Text in its original (and far less human-readable) form can be found at:
https://github.com/KranX/Vangers/blob/master/data/diagen_eng.text

Index:
-Podish-
-Podish- Q&A
-Incubator-
-Incubator- Q&A
-VigBoo-
-VigBoo- Q&A
-Ogorod-
-Ogorod- Q&A
-Lampasso-
-Lampasso- Q&A
-ZeePa-
-ZeePa- Q&A
-B-Zone-
-B-Zone- Q&A
-Spobs-
-Threall-
-Poponkas-
-Tabutasks-
-Passengers-
-Endings-

Everything in [square brackets] is the game's identifier for when to use the text

-Podish-

[quotha]
Hello poor pupa, still wheeling in the dust?

[Empty Question]
What are you mumbling about, pupa?

[Empty Molecule]
I have nothing to say, fitter. Leave me alone, I'm busy...

[Block Molecule:B]
Stop right there. I haven't finished yet!

[Out Molecule]
Get out of here!

[Dead Molecule]
We are happy by ourselves. Farewell to Fostral.

[Leepky Introduction]
Welcome back, poor pilgarlic! We thought you were completely dead, have to give another one away... 
You know how it happens: yesterday you were a dapper little caterpillar without a care in the world, and now you're climbing into your mechos and going up, ugh, from our warmth, up there to plow the roads on Fostral, scaring everyone you meet into ditches...
I see you're too dumb to listen to me. What are you worth, you worthless piece of trash.
Listen and remember, as you'll understand this later, if you survive, of course... 
I'm Leepky, the counselor of Podish, an escave on Fostral, which is what we call our world...
And you're a clot of mucus cast away from the pods. Your fate is clear: you'll take your rattletrap and be thrown out, as that's the law...
I hope your fate won't make you wait. It's excruciating living off a pod...
I've seen a lot of jerks like you, yet I still sympathize with you... They blinked innocently, just like you, not knowing who they were, where they were from, or where they should go...
All right, as a matter of routine, I must tell you about the anatomy of the universe... Now listen... 
Don't be afraid, there's no need to know too much. I used to give lengthy lessons talking about bunches, the Chain, the underground Larvae, about stupid Beeboorats that live on Glorx... I'd explain what raffa is, about kusowocks...
Yes, I see it's all for nothing: you look at me like ET trying to understand the message. At your wit's end? You haven't seen life inside or outside... 
So I'll do this the easy way: I'll give you the mission without splitting hairs... 
Fostral is big, and we're on the bottom. Our escave is here. Far up is Incubator, the holy place, which is where we send our tasty nymbos to prolong the Eleepod race. Remember our bios, it's superior to all the creatures in the Chain...
And now remember the main thing: you're on your own from this moment on, with no one to feed or lick or cuddle you... 
You are a maverick, your own master and servant; no one will give a pinch of cirt for your mistakes...
Your choice is mechos, an ancient machine you'll own and die in, for... there are quite a lot of you, knights of the road, who comb the worlds for gain and kill each other for chickenfeed... Vangers are beasts...
We Eleepods are kind to you, but only somewhat... We don't give a crap about your destiny, and you are free to do whatever you want. But remember: if you want to survive, you'd better listen to us, shrimp...
Only by serving Podish will you get everything from fast mechos to secret knowledge. Here's your first mission...
Get some secret nymbos from here and take it to the other end of Fostral, into sultry Incubator...
My Feenger's waiting there; he'll tell you more if you survive in the jungles of Fostral...
Farewell, kiddo, and good luck. Bring me some kusowocks...

[Eleepods Story]
So, rover, it's time to tell you about the basis of the universe: about us, the profound Eleepods...
The story of the Chain is cloudy to us; we don't like fairy tales like the Zeexen do...
That's why all the various rumors about ancient Softie and cursed Cryspo mean nothing to us. And if you are a fan of bedtime stories, go to Necross, where you'll have your ears stuffed with phlegma...
We Eleepods are not bound by time and real deeds. For us there is no past, and we do not care about tomorrow. However, we have studied the current moment at length and know everything about the present...
None of the inhabitants of the Chain have been allowed the feeling of Knowledge about the Condition of All Things that we have. We need but to collect all the chords from the pods into a unified harmony, at which point we will see all the worlds in our consciousness as a unified, motionless mold.
We are quietly stewing deep in Fostral and the happiness of dipping a comb in sticky phlegma and running it through protuberances swollen with nymbos, slipping the P-beam through vain worlds, is not for you or any other of the luckless to know, be they Beeboorats or Zeexen...
The essence of the Eleepods is all in pods and the feeling of unity. We do not have loneliness or the fear of the nubbin of life before the real, immense world, as our subconscious is wrapped up in pods... Then again, you probably don't need to know that, cirt hunter...
We will explain later the connection between pods and the P-beam. Not every vanger survives up above, and not every vanger is needed by the Eleepods. Remember: information about the current instant in all the universe is ours, and you are just the executor of our will...

[Cirt Story]
Well, wimble fitter, we now see your zeal, so we can tell you a bit more. You want to be our agent vanger, correct?
What I'm going to tell you now will reveal much inside the Chain. And if you understand me, and see what cirt is about, you'll settle down here for good. Not only on Fostral...
Remember: our sovereigns are Larvae. What is a Larva, you ask? Alas, we know very little, as our bunch hasn't been able to snag one...
Damn! It's rumored the Zeexen have a Larva... We know nothing about the Beeboorats, as for all their stupidity we cannot pry into the inner space of Glorx. Perhaps you'll find that out yourself...
You are wondering about the P-beam? You're right, we know everything, but Larvae are beyond us and pass unnoticed... Another rumor says there's a hidden Departed Bios on Xplo that has realized all dreams about the Larvae. The lucky guys, they don't have to yearn any more...
Now our cycles are dead without Larvae, and only their spirit enables us to go all the way through the Eleection, from Plump-up to Gulp-down, and then start over...
We get the Larva's spirit through cirt, plain soil taken from the worlds where our lords live. The problem is, the Larvae are unseen to you, the wheelers.
They crawl deep underground, much deeper than escaves. And their being is still a mystery to us...
All Larvae are different, and every cycle of our rotation requires a specific cirt: the only cirt from a unique Larva. We'll pay you well for the delivery of this specific cirt, you hucksters of fortune...
You only have to take the cirtainer, find the smelly soil and fill it up, and take it back to Podish and our bunch...

[Cirt Story Add]
However, I see no value coming from you in this affair yet, you lucky carter of eLeech. You can't get to Glorx through the Passage and reach our Larvae there yet. You know, only aliens live here on Fostral, and they're loathsome to us...
So serve us and you'll get the key to Glorx, you apostle of beebs...

[Bad Cirt Delivery:B]
What's that stinking stuff in your mechos, you crummy roamer? Where did you get THAT? Before you bring alien cirt here, you'd better think about whether or not we need it, you rusty bearing.
That's cirt from boneheaded Beeboorats or gabby Zeexen. Don't do that anymore or we will punish you...

[Good Cirt Delivery:G]
Gee whiz, fitter! Where did you get that precious cirt? You must have tickled the other vangers to death. Or did you really get to the Eleepods' Larva? All by yourself? 
As of today, you've brought us $(Cirt Delivery) portions of tastiest Eleepods' cirt. Keep serving us well, peaceful prospector!

[FIRST-Good Cirt Delivery:G]
What a rustler, full of zeal! Looks like you're going to be a famous cirt digger when you discover the worlds where our Larvae live...

[NO-Cirt Delivery]
Yeah, it's been a long time since I've seen a vanger as stupid as you. Look deep inside yourself, what do you see? In the container! So, what's there? 
Nothing is there, you blockhead! You crammed it full of useless soil and schlepped it around. You thought that was cirt? Wrong, you retard! It's just dust. The breath of Larvae hasn't touched your cargo...

[Nymbos in Inventory:B]
You were wrong, vanger, to come back to Podish with the nymbos. It's needed in Incubator, so get over there now...

[Phlegma in Inventory:G]
I see our talks are not in vain, vanger: you brought us phlegma. We Eleepods like to wallow in it...

[Vangers Killing Comments]
Rumors have reached me that you terminated someone's life up there. I hope it wasn't on purpose. 
Eleepods don't care much about you ramblers, but I'll give you some advice: no one will give a beeb for your life if you become too bold and keep killing other vangers, the slaves of bunches, on a whim. Think about it...

[eLeech Loss (with body):B]
How dare you come to Podish after that!? Did you even look in your bay? Death is there: the eLeech is dead!
Oh grief, I hear silence: his pod is crippled. They are now doomed to keep the bodiless - do you know that is? You're a dead man now. Buzz off, cursed one...

[eLeech Loss (w/o body):B]
I wonder what you could have done with the precious cargo we entrusted to you? Oh, sweet eLeech, where are you? Blockhead Feenger! How could he trust a fragile eLeech to such a freak? Where is the baby, you scat? You'll pay for this, green-fly. Now bug off!

[eLeech Delivery (2-(n-1)):G]
So, nimble fighter, you handle your mechos well. You have preserved the little eLeech, that's good. Your beebs are waiting...

[eLeech Delivery (n)]
At last! We already started the lament for the poor eLeech we entrusted to you. It's good you've come to Podish before our little treasure died an untimely death... You should practice, vanger. Don't mess up!

[Eleerection Win I:G]
Gee, fitter! You got here FIRST! You're now the hero of the Eleection, something the Eleepods will remember. We know how to separate the grain from the chaff...

[Beebos Prize Gift:G]
We Eleepods appreciate smart and efficient vangers, and we are granting you a handful of beebs for your pain. Know our generosity, cunning hearse-rider. And keep on serving us as well...

[Eleerection Win II:G]
You won again, charioteer of golden eLeeches! The Eleection is your element. We have some plans for you... Eleepods don't favor all vangers, as I'm sure you know there are a lot of crooks among you. But you have won our trust and are in the saddle...

[Key to Glorx Gift:G]
My pod has decided to give you a secret of other worlds. Fostral is big, but we need cirt hunters. You know the key to Glorx now, as I taught your Spiral. Try and visit that world, and if you come back alive, we'll talk about our plans...

[Eleerection Win III+:G]
Vanger, you are the best! The Eleection is yours; there's nothing for the others to catch here. But what are you still doing in our world? The time has come to go to Glorx, the world of the brutal Beeboorats...

[Bad Larva Delivery:B]
I see a loaded conlarver. Opening it... 
ALARM! ALL ELEEPODS GET DOWN! Alien Larva in Podish! Disaster!!! Everybody hold your breath, I'm closing the filthy conlarver! Phew... Did it... Breathing... 
So, damn saboteur, you wanted to ruin the revered Eleepods with an alien Larva? We got you, freak! What shall we do with you? We are not like the Beeboorats who would torture a vanger for less... 
The danger is over, and I'm feeling friendly again. You got away with one this time, nasty screw. I'll just fine you ten thousand beebs for my fright...

[Good Larva Delivery:G]
I see a loaded conlarver. Opening... 
Oh, it's heaven on Fostral: our Larva is here!!! I'm plumping! It's a MIRACLE! I think I'm gonna burst... Ecstasy... Oh, my queen, eat all of me! The Eleepods have won: all the pods are petrified with delight. Wait, Your Majesty Vanger......................................... 
Well, not all of my scratchers have awoken from the wonderful ambrosia. Be proud, wheeler, you have won my favor. The Eleepods are your friends forever! 
There's no feat greater than securing an Eleepod Larva. I noticed you long ago, vanger, and have been waiting and hoping for your strong mind and heroic ways! Fortune came to us with you, the best pilgrim of the Chain, the Eleepods' apostle. 
From now on $(Cycle Name of Locked Larva) is an extinct word. $(Cycle Name of Locked Larva) is inside Eleepods now. We have the Larva now, and when the time comes, we'll lick her passionately. Down with the cirt for $(Cycle Name of Locked Larva), we don't need it anymore. Ecstasy is ours!

[Heroin in Inventory:B]
Oh, grief to my pod! My scratchers are drying out from horror and disgust. The dumb wheeler brought something, and that something is a vile Beeboorat! Get out of here, lame duck! Don't multiply my anger.

[Shrub in Inventory]
Ah, you little rogue! Give me the shrub quickly! I'll put it in my cellar to enjoy in my spare time. My pod will be famous among the Eleepods for its zoo!

[Poponka in Inventory:G]
Oh, you have kusowocks! You haven't forgotten my lessons, brave soldier. My scratchers are shuddering and flopping from joy, anticipating the miracle of possessing this marvelous gift!

[Toxick in Inventory]
Hello, dust picker. I see you've been to the world of the worthless Zeexen, which shows your bravery and savvy. But you shouldn't have come here with that gunk, only those dumb beasts need it. Better bring me some kusowocks. I know you can get them...

[Kernoboo in Inventory]
Ugh, what's that smell? The stink of Glorx is all around, evoking the vicious Beeboorats... You should have left their stupid toys there, let the dull beasts choke on them. But with your courage you'll be sure to get some beebs and maybe even some kusowocks for me...

[Pipetka in Inventory]
Oh, an alien peeperette... The rotten winds of Glorx carry them like the thoughts of the doltish Beeboorats and throw them to and fro, dropping them into water... But I digress. You're a brave, crazy mechos rider, and I'll give you some beebs for your trouble. Try your luck again!

[WeeZyk in Inventory]
O-o-o! My dream has come true. For so long I've been dreaming about this kusowock, sitting in the still of the escave and swimming in phlegma. It's a rare guest on Fostral, and we greet it with all due respect. You deserve many beebs, brave vanger!

[MP0 Start]
Pluck up your courage, vanger: the VAN-WAR has started! You'll show your prowess and taste the fury of the brave in the rage of battle. Kill them all and die many times, reviving for revenge. I, a canny Eleepod, will count all the bodies and name the winner.

[MP1 Start]
Hey wheeler, the MECHOSOMA has begun! You must bring us wads of sundry wares. Now go and load up, as the others are already on their way, anticipating their profits. If you prove to be an effective merchant, you'll get your due reward: a new mechos and glory throughout the Chain.

[MP2 Start]
The PASSEMBLOSS has begun! Hit the road, wheeler! Step on the gas and push the others; rush to your goal and don't look back. You'll meet your fate around a bend. Don't be afraid of those glowing circles, as you have to go from one to the next, your compass guiding you through.

[MP3 Start]
HUNTAGE started!

[MP4 Start]
MUSTODONT started!

[MP0 Comment]
The VAN-WAR is in full swing and you are quaking in an escave, you stinking coward! Go up into the world and find the chump who dared offend you. Show him what the anger of a real hero means. You want to take a decent gun to shoot up those drips? I'll sell it for half the price if you disappear quick!

[MP1 Comment]
The MECHOSOMA is going full blast... And what about you, brave wheeler, are you shipping wares? How much phlegma and precious nymbos have you brought into our escaves? Work hard and don't drive your rusty mechos empty...

[MP2 Comment]
The PASSEMBLOSS is in full fling up there... It's unbecoming to a true racer to sit out in an escave, so hurry up and catch up to your competitors while you still can... Don't forget: you have to go from circle to circle, following your compass...

[MP3 Comment]
HUNTAGE in progress...

[MP4 Comment]
MUSTODONT in progress...

[Larva 0 Note]
$(World of Larva0) is where the Larva is, the Queen of Plump-up!

[Larva 1 Note]
$(World of Larva1) is where the Larva is, the Queen of the Eleection!

[Larva 2 Note]
$(World of Larva2) is where the Larva is, the Queen of Gulp-down!

[Protractor in Inventory]
It's been a long time since my pod last saw the Protractor... That mysterious object, beyond time and space. It works wonders and captivates beebs. The guide of the roads...

[Mechanic Messiah in Inventory:B]
I don't fear you, Mechanical Messiah! A pod of glossy and chubby Eleepods is behind me, we'll survive! Find yourself other prey: the stupid wheeler you caught. No one really needs him, besides the beebs who are waiting for the chance to gnaw at his remains in a ditch...

[Function-83 in Inventory:G]
Oh, you've secured the mysterious device... That's good. Your Function will surely help us get some kusowocks from distant worlds. Take care of it, don't drop it in a ditch, and don't show it to the Beeboorats or they'll grab the jewel of the Chain, the barbarians...

[Spummy in Inventory:B]
I feel the Chomper... The horror left its cage and came to Leepky. I didn't think I'd see the dreadful thing again. Oh, I won't survive this! It seems I'm dying, and YOU are to blame, scavenger! 
How dare you, crummy hearse-rider, bring the curse of the Softie here? I know whose plan this is! It's a plot of the evil Beeboorats! No, I won't die. Get out of Podish, you heap of dung, and die in a hole, clutching at your filthy cargo...

[Boot Sector in Inventory:G]
You don't have Boot Sector by accident, explorer. You want to own a dozen mechos, little rogue? Your dream has come true! Kind Leepky will take care of your gear while you're out in another mechos combing the worlds for kusowocks...

[Peelot in Inventory]
If you take part in the Eleection, don't use your Flymatic. It's a low-tech widget that knows the way, all right, but isn't really fast... An amusing doodad...

[Leepuringa Return (Good):G]
At last! Leepuringa returned to its burrow! It's a stroke of luck, my pod is ringing the bells! I'll be writing poems again, feasting my eyes on the wonderful kusowock... You are the savior of the Eleepods, nimble vanger. I'll give you treasure! 
You probably think you know Fostral backwards and forwards, but I'll tell you something new: near the Passage to Glorx there is a secret place... It's open to you... I Don't know what's in it...

[Leepuringa Return (Bad)]
What we have here is a rare case of remorse. The motor-bandit, thief, and tough guy returning the stolen goods. Well, I'll forgive you, wheeler. To tell the truth, I was saddened by your knavish betrayal; there are no words for it... 
All right, I hope you didn't do it with evil intentions; your mechos wasn't that smart... Go away, greenhorn, and don't steal things any more!

[Boorawchick in Inventory]
Oooh, Boorawchick paid us, the humble Eleepods, a visit. What an honor! You beeboorattish freak, you came to plead for our forgiveness? Felt your doom coming on after eating a dozen eLeeches? 
All right, you filthy sample of the hellish progeny of Glorx. I know, it's not your mind that steers you; your stomach does, which is always as empty as your head... Go and ride your slave...

[Queen Frog part note]
You are a pushy vanger, friend of the wheels, and you handle your mechos flawlessly. The hardware in your hands fulfills our wishes and requests. And now, a new mechos is waiting for you! I'll tell you some secrets of the art of building mechos. 
From now on you'll know that Heavy Iron is an aquatic mechos that Queen Frog once lost...

[Lawn Mover part note]
You are a pushy vanger, friend of the wheels, and you handle your mechos flawlessly. The hardware in your hands fulfills our wishes and requests. And now a new mechos is waiting for you! I'll tell you some secrets of the art of building mechos. 
From now on you'll know that Star is a part of Lawn Mower, the ruler of the sky...

[Weexow visit]
The drops from Weexow are still glittering on your mechos alongside the scratches made by the sharks there... A brave vanger is standing before me, that's for sure. And expecting a reward, I suppose? However, your quests far away from the Larvae are of little use to us, roamer.

[Boozeena visit]
Aha, a rambler from Boozeena. So, naughty rover, have you by any chance lost your marbles among the magnificent corals and evil statues?

[Ark-a-Znoy visit]
Been seeking your fate among the sands and beasts of Ark-a-Noi, vanger? Yeah, it was a long, long trip to your doom... But you survived, nimble warrior!

[Khox visit]
You've been to Khox, I see. And did you see the city, did you try the darkness? Say, is it true that there's a lot of wrecked mechos on the sides of the roads that tried to push through to the light... in vain...? Not that I care, though. I've never been and don't plan on going there!

[hMok visit]
Oh, you've been to the ancient curse on hMok. Say, how did the conversation go? What did you gather from it? How did hMok greet you?.. You won't say? I know, you're sorry for being so stupid as to engage in that crazy adventure...

[Threall visit]
Say, loony, what drove you to suicide? Someone's evil will, I guess... Nobody in his right mind would go there, into the lakes of lava, into the hell of the Chain... My pod is giving you advice: don't get even close to the Passage to Threall.

[Eleepod in Inventory:G]
Greetings to you, envoy of Incubator! How is my Feenger getting on? I felt he chilled his scratcher while stirring phlegma. Are the eLeeches growing up well? Do the Beeboorats annoy them?

[Beeboorat in Inventory]
Oh, vanger, you caught a Beeboorat for me? That's good! Beebs have bred in large amounts, and Podish is so rife with them that I stumble over the little scabs. This brave one will help us. You hear me, dweller of Glorx? You are an insect killer from now on. You'll live on a chain and eat phlegma...

[Zeex in Inventory]
Aha, envoy of Necross! You came to pick up tales and rumors, saucebox? Or you want to laugh me out of Podish? Don't even think about it. Your tongue is sharp, all right, but your head is empty.

[Key to Weexow Gift:G]
All my scratchers may not be enough to count your great deeds. You've earned the key to Weexow. It seems there is a precious object buried in that world. It will help you on your long quests...

[ruBeecation warning]
You caught my fancy with your diligence, vanger, and I want to save you from the dreadful fate that awaits you on Glorx. The first escave you come to must be Ogorod, the lowest on Glorx. 
You'll get the sacramental object from a dull counselor there in one of the cycles. Don't even peek into the other Beeboorat escaves without it!

[Spummy Death]
It finally happened! The Eleepods have heard of a vanger who flew through time... bypassing our P-beams... I'm melting - the Lord of the Chain has arrived, the utter rambler. 
I forget when I last went through something like this, the appearance of the Soul... The Chomper has been revived... 
For you, pilgrim, who've been through all the hardships of the Chain, the Passage to enigma has opened... In the center of Fostral it lies all alone, unknown to the rest of you. Explore the mystery that dwells behind it... 
Farewell, Vanger from Legends. We won't meet again, as your way goes into infinity and there is no way back for any of you... You are the most elaborate in the Chain and have been selected for the Ultimate Report... 
Don't forget your friends, the shy Eleepods, and forgive us for what you've been through. Now you are Different... Go...

[Larvae Vision note:G]
Vanger! By raising your Dominance you've reached revelation! The Holy Larva has decided to show you her eternal way. Look at the map in your proud mechos, and among the vanities of the world you'll see Her. And get moving!

[Last Letter]
To the one who returns here, a farewell letter: the Passage to Earth is open to you. Go there. The prophecy of the Last Vanger has come true. It's here you emerged and from here you will start your journey to the outside. The Eleepods will not witness this...


-Podish- Q&A

[mechos]
You are its slave from now on. The mechos is your servant - subdue it!
The machine of your life and death. It can be taken across worlds, ridden on land or under water, flown, ridden underground...

[Fostral]
We are on Fostral now, on our world. You won't understand what I mean until you learn the nature of the Chain. Now go up and touch Fostral - your mechos is waiting.
Fostral is the world of the Eleepods and consists of five belts. Our escave, Podish, is on the first, bottommost belt. Incubator is on fifth, uppermost belt. The second and fourth belts contain Passages, which you may have already noticed.

[Eleepods]
I'm Leepky, an Eleepod, and you are an Eleepod's offspring, but not an Eleepod...
Eleepods are the most important bios. We live on Fostral, and Podish is our escave. All the others will die out soon, but we will remain here forever...

[Leepky]
It's me, stupid. I'm Leepky, the counselor of Podish. I'm Leepky. Leepky. That's me - you remember my name, blockhead...
Ugh! 'Who is Leepky?' You still don't remember, you dolt? I'm Leepky!

[Podish]
You're here now, in Podish, where our precious bunch lives. And where you were born...
Where do you think you are now? You look bad - go sleep in a ditch, it'll be good for you. Maybe that'll help you remember where you started out...

[escave]
Escave is an underground city. My escave is Podish, for example...
All the bunches in the Chain live in escaves, the hidden cities of the worlds. That's where you'll find the store where you can buy or sell goods, and it's where we, the counselors, reside.

[pod]
You're too dumb for that, son. Forget about them, they're not for you...
We Eleepods live in pods. That's all you need to know for now...

[bunch]
What bunch? You're not from any bunch. You're a beeb eater.
All bios have bunches, the communities we live in. For us, the bunches are everything, the meaning of life itself...

[The Chain]
The Lost Chain of Worlds...
Fostral is not the only world. There are others, too, and you can get to them through Passages. Our neighbors are Glorx and... no, that's enough for now.

[Larvae]
You are not ready for this. You are much too young for the Eternal Larvae.
What's a Larva? I wish I knew more about them. They are the Lords of the Chain, and I get excited whenever I hear about them. Bring us a Larva! Or at least get us some cirt from one...

[Beeboorats]
Arrogant creatures, a hundred times worse than Zeexen. They gobble our eLeeches and season them with nymbos, the vandals! Don't even think of visiting them. They'll wolf down any Eleepod if they get even a glimpse of his wet scratchers. But we'll teach them a lesson one of these days!
Glorx is the world of the Beeboorats, creatures who don't deserve to live anywhere. You'd better stay away from them...

[Glorx]
Why do you want to know about Glorx? To you, it's nothing but a foul word!
There's a Passage on Fostral leading to Glorx. It's a world of water, dangerous for travelers, but unfortunately Glorx is the crossroads between all worlds, curse the builders of this Chain! And curse the Beeboorats with them, those hellspawn!

[raffa]
You better hold your tongue, spring chicken. You'll see them soon enough - there are a lot of them up there...
Can't say much about the raffa. The beasts are everywhere, setting traps for the Eleepods. I bet that you've noticed them. And that they've noticed you...

[kusowocks]
Oh, kusowocks, what do you know about kusowocks? Nothing! You haven't seen kusowocks, and I won't show you mine. Get me a couple and then we'll talk...
You just keep asking questions, but where are the kusowocks? I won't show you mine, not even for my ears, you bootlicker...

[Incubator]
The holy place where Eleepod poets of the burrows are born...
This place is at the top of Fostral. That's where Feenger lives. You'll have no trouble finding it.

[bios]
Bios? Our bios is the greatest, and all the others are nothing but dust...
There are currently three bios in the Chain: the Eleepods, Zeexen, and Beeboorats, those darn gluttons...

[cirt]
Cirt is all we need...
Find some and we'll buy it. But you've got to get one thing right: we will only take cirt from OUR Larvae...

[Feenger]
Feenger is my shadow. Go pay him a visit.
Haven't you been to Incubator, rambler? Feenger's in the same pod as me. Hah, I can hear him dipping his tail in phlegma right now, the rogue!

[Passage]
Passage? Where did you hear that word?
A Passage is how you get to other worlds. Fostral has many Passages, one into Glorx, for instance.

[Zeexen]
Zeexen? Ugh, what a terrible word! Looks like you're just here to annoy me, hearse rider...
Zeexen, Zeexen... strange creatures... We don't like them... Stay away from the Zeexen...

[eLeech]
An eLeech is a wonderful creature. You used to be an eLeech too, but not for very long.
eLeeches come into the world in Incubator. Any vanger who attempts to take an eLeech's life or ruins him during Eleection deserves death.

[nymbos]
Your nymbos will never wake, rambler.
The Eleepods will pay you for shipping it from Podish to Incubator...

[Eleection]
This rite is in place to prolong the race of the Eleepods. It's the cycle that follows the Plump-up. The time for speedy vangers to show off!
You can take part in it, and if you win, you'll be rewarded. But take care of your eLeech, or else...

[vangers]
Who are vangers? And you're asking me, the counselor? Ugh, the kind of idiots I have to put up with!
YOU are a vanger, dolt. One of the contemptible slaves of the outside machines. You are all our servants!

[phlegma]
The blood of Incubator...
Mucus for the good of the Eleepods. We love to smear ourselves with it and plump ourselves up in the peace and quiet of our burrows...

[The Softie]
Ask the Zeexen. They're the tale-tellers. We don't like tales.

[The Cryspo]
Are you a vanger? Or a collector of tales about those who are long gone? Time for you to head up. They'll set you straight, the hard way!

[Necross]
We've never been there. Ask your vanger friends, if you have any. Or go there yourself!

[P-beam]
That's our secret - with it we can perceive the whole world as it is, regardless of distance. Fear us, scum, for we know all there is to know!

[Xplo]
Xplo... You're too curious, my friend. For now, it's nothing more than a word.

[Departed Bios]
Humph... One of the mysteries of the Chain. We don't really believe in them.

[Plump-up]
The beginning of the Eleepod rotation. Ecstasy for the pods and abeyance for the elder chords. Floods of nymbos...

[Gulp-down]
The final stage of our sacral rotation. The eLeeches reach Podish and start to gobble sweetly, slowly absorbing the chord of the chosen one, who has been waiting for his eLeech while staying in the mind of the pod...

[beebs]
You are a slave to the beebs, you wheeled huckster. You'll kill anyone for the beebs! That's just your fate as a mercenary vanger.

[Creature Soup]
Don't swear!

[The Clash]
That's a Zeexen tale. Go ask them!

[Spiral]
A mechos part, used to travel to other worlds through Passages. But remember: the Spiral doesn't last forever, so you must recharge it at a special station before you can enter a Passage...

[ruBeecation]
You've learned the wickedness of the Beeboorats and now, I'm sure, you abhor your fate. Well, bite the bullet, wheeler. It's your destiny to bear the yoke branded upon you with disgrace, the sign of the tyrants of the wet Glorx.

[Rubbox]
The stupidity of the Beeboorats is immense. They pick on poor vangers with these crooked tins. When we, the wise Eleepods, read what is written on them, we are horrified by the abyss of wickedness into which the Beeboorats have sunk...

[VigBoo]
An escave on Glorx, the main Beeboorat hangout. The source of evil, from the abyss of infinite stupidity. Miserable is the vanger who arrives there. But that's the fate of all you rambling wheelers.

[Lampasso]
Lampasso... Oh, you'll learn something about the Beeboorats there. They run sports games in Lampasso, where crowds of dolts try to top one another in the art of jackassery. And many manage, which makes their bosses happy.

[Ogorod]
We know that not only vangers find their doom there by the will of the local Buro, but Beeboorats also. They put them into pots like rotten mushrooms. Doesn't that make you quiver? You're heartless if it doesn't.

[Valorin]
If they put this stuff in your bay, be afraid - your doom is coming. This is a filthy Beeboorat on the way to the stadium. He'll unscrew his head there or take off his limb, an appropriate fate for the doltish beast.

[shrub]
I'll tell you a secret. The doltish Beeboorats bring them to Ogorod and leave them there to rot. We, the blessed Eleepods, have found a better use for shrubs.

[peeperette]
Pipetkas are the seeds of Glorx. No one knows what they're for. But Beeboorats are greedy - they pick up these stinkweeds and store them in their cache. The beasts probably devour these fruits of raffish Jablees, choking and panting - just not to waste the stuff.

[Nucleoboom]
Nucleobooms are unripe peeperettes. It seems they feed the idiots in the stadium with these stinkweeds. And the dolts get even more doltish, as impossible as that sounds.

[Jablees]
This dirt flies above Glorx quite often, and it comes from Ogorod. From cycle to cycle the Jablees scatter seeds, and the Beeboorats are terribly proud of them. Their stupidity just keeps growing...

[Progress]
To sound a bit cleverer, the Beeboorats came up with a couple words. But we know they mean nothing. They're just the pathetic creations of the beasts' moronic brains...

[Heroism]
They're nothing to us, just words that the stupid vangers bring from Glorx.

[Election of the Castaways]
In the waters of Glorx will you find the answer to your question, in the place where the victims of Beeboorats have found their resting place...

[castaway]
Beeboorats don't have pods, and so their thoughts collide. That's how castaways originate, the poor things that were kicked out...

[PeepShow]
That must be a funny show. Crowds of silly vangers stuff their cargo holds with rotten peeperettes, hurrying and shoving each other all over the place.

[Nuclear War]
Well, this performance is like the PeepShow. The same fuzz-buzz, Nucleobooms and Jablees. Beeboorats hardly realize how silly it all looks...

[Geer'ah]
Ah, Geer'ah! The filthy counselor sits there and enjoys himself, watching morons compete and leap around, bashing each other. A strange amusement indeed...

[Boorawchick]
Spawn of the devil, a rude beast, and how dull he is! For this dullness, he was elected the counselor of VigBoo. And how many tender eLeeches he has devoured, I cannot count. But he will pay for that a hundredfold, some day.

[Oboorez]
An old, moldy Beeboorat, the counselor in Ogorod. Sits there among the shrubs, slowly losing his marbles...

[The Buro]
Let me tell you something. Beeboorats don't have pods like we do, and, driven by jealousy, they invented the Buro in an attempt to copy us.

[Slave]
We know the dull beasts enslave every vanger who comes to them, giving each the rank of Slave. They take away all his stuff and chain a Rubbox to him.

[Commissar]
We don't play these games. Try finding out for yourself, if you want.

[Agent]
If you bear the Beeboorat yoke, it doesn't matter whether you're called Slave, Commissar, or Agent. None of them will make you happy...

[Manual]
The dull beasts invented their Manual to make up for the lack of little gray cells in their brains and to add color to their dull existence. But we, the wise Eleepods, can see through this nonsense.

[ZeePa]
An escave on faraway Necross, covered in ooze and mud. There, the Zeexen rust.

[B-Zone]
The second escave of the purposeless Zeexen. A dead hole in the stink of the bogs.

[Zeephra]
Zeephra is known as the best fable-teller. We Eleepods just laugh at her. First she tells you a tale, then she forgets it and tells it the other way around. Her empty head can't hold a thought for long. And then she can get scared for no reason at all and just take off.

[Zeekatrix]
Zeekatrix is the counselor of B-Zone. Don't be surprised, but I once personally heard her jabberwocky. Zeexen's stupidity drives them out of their escaves to ramble around and gaze at their imperfect world.

[toxick]
Be careful with it, wheeler, or you'll lose your mechos immediately!

[popon]
Despite the Zeexen's dullness, they write well. We find the fables and tales on those tablets very funny at times. We value popons, wheeler, so they won't go to waste here.

[ProtoZeek]
Oh, the dream of every Eleepod. Our scratchers cling to the strange figurine and stroke it endlessly... Just bring it to me. Your reward will be massive!

[Spring]
Spring? We care not about the events of Necross. Let it drown in the swamps, for our bunch will remain here forever...

[December]
You came here from Necross to ask that stupid question? Well, go back. The answer lies there.

[Saturday]
I know this word remains from ancient times. The Zeexen store this stuff in their brains, and it makes you think they're insane!

[Zeeklope]
Zeeklope worries us a lot. We know that stupid vangers ride across the swamps of Necross at this time and try to get ProtoZeek from each other. And we know who allowed the precious object to be mishandled - Zeephra!

[Weexow]
You can get to Weexow from Fostral. This world is definitely too small for the amount of water it holds! The wild beasts will meet you there and throw cold water on your desire to explore the Chain's more remote areas.

[Boozeena]
A secret world that abhors dabblers. You must know the alphabet and the magic word to mark the symbols in the proper order. Zeephra, the filthy beast, keeps the key to Boozeena. She'll demand a heap of cirt for it, but don't give it to her! The Eleepods will lick you all over for that...

[Threall]
Guests on Threall are met with a storm of fireballs and heat. The spirits of the lords of the Chain are there, and you are but a speck of dust to them...

[hMok]
This world has been cast away from the Chain and bears the curse of the ancients. Evil rests there, sheathed in steel. Until the time comes. Find a way to the key and destroy it. You have started your way along the road to doom!

[Khox]
Legend says that the Softie built this world. You'll have to rush from post to post without stopping, as quick as you can.

[Ark-a-Noi]
Vast, evil sands, with masses of weird rocks among them.

[Protractor]
A weird object. Don't know where to find it. Can't tell what it's for. The rumors say, however, that it threatens all of Threall...

[Mechanical Messiah]
I'd take good care not to number it among the kusowocks. There's nothing scarier for you rambling wheelers.

[Function-83+]
A gift from the architects of the Passages - your guide to the Chain of Worlds.

[Chomper]
The curse of hMok, the hand of the past. It threatens all bios in the Chain...

[Boot Sector]
They say the vangers made it. But I don't believe it - you're too dumb for that. There are some greater powers which dictate the fate of the Chain.

[Flymatic]
These things lie on the cursed worlds and will seal the fate of those dumb enough to take them...

[The Spectators]
That's what the Passage architects, now gone forever, were once called. But their traces can still be found on the hot and empty world of Xplo.

[The Infernals]
We are a little afraid of them. With our P-beam we can sense an alien mind on Threall, watching the other worlds and directing the other species. You'd better keep away from Threall, my youthful friend.

[Spobs]
A derelict escave on Xplo. From it, we feel a flood of weird thoughts.

[Parapheen]
I know all the counselors in the Chain - the stupid Geer'ah, for example, and the empty Zeephra. It's been a long time since the malicious Boorawchick has inspired me with disgust. But anyway, this name is unknown to me.

[Carmane]
The psychoemanations of Threall have entered this word. Some unknown powers are casting it on the Chain. Am I speaking clearly, rambler?


-Incubator-

[quotha]
What's new in the world, rambler?

[Empty Question]
Want to ask me something? Speak clearer...

[Empty Molecule]
That's all, fitter. Leave me alone, I'm busy...

[Block Molecule:B]
Stop right there, little bug. Listen to me!

[Out Molecule:B]
Get out of here!

[Dead Molecule]
We are happy by ourselves. Farewell to Fostral.

[Feenger Introduction]
Aha, another green vanger! Get lost up there, you naughty rambler?
Ok, ok, you're a victim of fate already... I'm glad you got here and didn't drown or encounter your 'friends'... 
Let's meet... in case you keep your body and soul together for a while... I'm Feenger, Leepky is my host - I'm in his pod...
Well, you're too young to understand this, but remember one thing: I don't really exist, Feenger is a function of the pod...
All my thoughts are his thoughts; for example, if I'm scratching myself, he is scratching himself, too. The host - Leepky to you - knows everything about me and even more; actually, I AM him to some extent...
Pods are the base of Eleepods' life. We're so comfortable that I feel embarrassed for you that you're alone - being outside is frightening...
Every time I give you an eLeech, I beg Him to leave the baby in Podish and not to part my nursling from the Eleepod bunch. But alas...
All right, enough of that chit-chat, it's time for you to go up - Incubator is not your home. I hope you now understand Fostral's formation and will be able to easily make your way down to Podish...
Your task is to get some soft phlegma into your mechos, as we need it in Podish. You can get phlegma in the shop to the left of me. We'll pay for the delivery. Now, get to your strange world...

[Eleerection Story]
It's now time to tell you about Eleepods' routine. You're not a rookie in Incubator anymore, and we can now trust you with an eLeech. Now listen...
All living creatures in the Chain are subject to the laws of flesh, and every bunch has its own cycle. We're all under the thrall of the creepy Creature Soup, and those who couldn't make their way to Larvae are now dead and no more...
Our essence is in taking our cherished eLeeches to Podish. And here's a rough plan of our rotation; you'd better learn it, or you'll be a beggar or die somewhere in a ditch from brutal vangers or, what would be even worse, raffa...
In the beginning is Plump-up - that's what we call it. Some pods select a low chord, his body starts to plump (everyone gets a kick out of that). The nymbos moves and bubbles inside the chosen Eleepod, and now this pod's all nervous and uptight...
The tension is eternal, and we are at the climax! The sound of the low chord now surges higher and higher... Whizz, bang... and silence: the chord is cut short... The ripe nymbos is now ready for delivery into Incubator, its rightful place...
How eLeeches are born is our secret. Just wait until the new cycle of our rotation, the Eleection, my friend. You will be in your element in this crazy race...
You'll take an eLeech, the jewel of the pod. Take care of him, as nature's set things up in such a way that the eLeech is defenseless and doesn't live long.
You are the ones who take them back to Podish. That's why we keep you around, fitters of the roads, pilots of Fostral...
Our rite is harsh yet sweet for you. The one who proves to be the smartest and comes to Podish with the eLeech first will be greatly rewarded and will gain our favor.
The one who fails and ruins the eLeech will pay for it. The cost will be high, and you will fear us then...
At the end is the Gulp-down. The dapper eLeeches finally reach the bodies, which have cooled off after the Plump-up, and now are awaiting revival. The eLeeches then are taken into their cool embrace and take the pulpy gift: Eleepod flesh.
And soon the pod will hear the newborn chord, just like the chosen one, who gave the nymbos...
The Eleepods are the masters of Fostral. You must have seen the change of colors up there, on the ground: this is the way you see our cycle, the way we govern you. You have some knowledge now about Eleepods, and you can cater to us. Test your fate...

[Passages Story]
Hello, tireless vanger. We Eleepods approve of the way you drive your mechos, machine of life and death...
Do you want to know what the greatest mechos add-on is? A way to see the entire Chain, as plain as the nose on your face, where (F) is for Fostral and (G) is for Glorx our neighbor? Then listen...
Ages ago, the Softie, an extinct race, built the first Passage into the new world, one different from their own. And that new world was Fostral.
They didn't stop there, going on into the jungle of pipes they opened the way to Glorx, then Xplo, Necross...
Then there was the Clash, and then the Creature Soup... But they're very likely Zeexen's fabrications, so you shouldn't trust them...
What matters is there are Passages up there that you must have noticed, as they're very distinct. You might have tried to get into them, genius...
They are eternal. Even if everything were to change, they would still be here, under control of the Eleepods, connecting the worlds of the Chain...
Every mechos is more than just a machine for wandering; they all hold a Spiral, which allows fearless travelers to go through Passages.
But the Passages don't let just anyone through: each one is unique, with its own key.
The Softie were a bit strange in how they tried to hide everything from everyone, and created spell cyphers without which it is impossible to get to other worlds.
We Eleepods know one key that unlocks the Passage from Fostral to Glorx. And you will get it if you win the Eleection, a deadly game...
The pods are anxious for their virgin eLeeches to come back and join them. And if you help them, vanger, you'll get the key to Glorx, crossroads of the worlds...

[eLeech in Inventory:B]
You're crazy, wheeler! I sense an exceedingly delicate chord: you, unlucky as you are, have returned with an eLeech. Eleection is in full swing, so quickly race to the top and into Podish. The eLeech won't want to wait!

[Nymbos in Inventory:G]
Your choice of cargo was a good one, wheelman, you have a bright future... Nymbos is what the Eleepods need here, in wonderful Incubator...

[Vangers Killing Comments]
What, did you kill something, you wild hearse-rider? On the other hand, just like the wild vangers, life for us holds no meaning. That's where fear takes you outside a pod...

[Eleerection Participation Question]
Vanger, the Eleection is coming up. The Eleepods are giving you the chance to participate in something holy. Do you agree to wait here until the abundant Plump-up and eLeeches emerge from the abyss of dreams?
Ok, worm, I'll wait... 
The inevitable has happened! The eLeeches have come. Take him and bring him to Podish, but remember: the eLeech is very fragile. As soon as the Gulp-down starts, he'll die forever. Hurry up, charioteer! 
I have something more important to do.
We are not forcing you, cowardly dungler. Every eLeech is a miracle meant for the silent world of Eleepods. You go and find yourself a stinking heap of scrap to live in, where you can hunt for beebs...

[Cirt in Inventory]
I can smell the cirt in your bay, you fortune trader. But it's Leepky who takes the cirt from you. Go to Podish; the heart of Eleepods is there!

[BadCirt in Inventory:B]
Although I'm just an appendage, I can feel that something is wrong here... But I don't understand what... My head is swirling and my scratchers are depressed...

[GoodCirt in Inventory:G]
I'm not a taster, just an appendage, but still I would like to ride with you to Podish and guard your smelly cargo. Take care of it!

[Larva in Inventory]
Wow, wheeler, your cargo has me more worried than ever before... My pod is strung up and you have a conlarver in your bay... And it's full... 
A Larva is in there... I feel the breath of eternity, a great event is coming... But I'm not up for opening the trap, you know. Leepky is the master of Eleepods. Fly over to him quickly and take care of your precious cargo!

[MP0 Start]
Pluck up your courage, vanger: the VAN-WAR has started! You'll show your prowess and taste the fury of the brave in the rage of battle. Kill them all and die many times, reviving for revenge. I, a canny Eleepod, will count all the bodies and name the winner.

[MP1 Start]
Hey wheeler, the MECHOSOMA has begun! You must bring us wads of sundry wares. Now go and load up, as the others are already on their way, anticipating their profits. If you prove to be an effective merchant, you'll get your due reward: a new mechos and glory throughout the Chain.

[MP2 Start]
The PASSEMBLOSS has begun! Hit the road, wheeler! Step on the gas and push the others; rush to your goal and don't look back. You'll soon meet your fate. Don't be afraid of those glowing circles, as you have to go from one to the next, your compass guiding you through.

[MP3 Start]
HUNTAGE started!

[MP4 Start]
MUSTODONT started!

[MP0 Comment]
The VAN-WAR is in full swing and you are quaking in an escave, you stinking coward! Go up into the world and find the chump who dared offend you. Show him what the anger of a real hero means. You want to take a decent gun to shoot up those drips? I'll sell it for half the price if you disappear quick!

[MP1 Comment]
The MECHOSOMA is going full blast... And what about you, brave wheeler, are you shipping wares? How much phlegma and precious nymbos have you brought into our escaves? Work hard and don't drive your rusty mechos empty...

[MP2 Comment]
The PASSEMBLOSS is in full fling up there... It's unbecoming to a true racer to sit out in an escave, so hurry up and catch up to your competitors while you still can... Don't forget: you have to go from circle to circle, following your compass...

[MP3 Comment]
HUNTAGE in progress...

[MP4 Comment]
MUSTODONT in progress...

[Protractor in Inventory]
I see you have Protractor, you pushy wheeler. Legends speak volumes about it. So, you decided to try the ancient toy yourself? Take care, it's a dangerous artifact.

[Mechanic Messiah in Inventory:B]
Get out, you plague carrier! The holy eLeeches live and ripen here. The evil vibrations, the streams of fear that your Messiah pours out will surely harm them. Remember, vanger, your way is now crooked and dark, ending in hell. Quiver with fear...

[Function-83 in Inventory]
Every vanger dreams of a personal Passage in his hold... You are the luckiest! But know this: it won't save you from the anger of Eleepods, should you decide, for example, to steal an eLeech!

[Spummy in Inventory:B]
Oh, what's happening to me?... My scratchers have hardened and I can't move them... I can hear eLeeches inwardly scream with horror... And crowds of newly hatched fears excruciate my soul... The vision of the Clash... 
Damn, the Chomper have come! I beg you, vanger, take your terrifying cargo away, don't torture me. We didn't bring you up to see the horror of the universe in our burrows. Vanish, limb of the devil!

[Boot Sector in Inventory]
Oh, you picked up Boot Sector? I have to say, you are invulnerable now. The ultramundane powers prepared this gift for you. I don't know why...

[Peelot in Inventory]
You picked up a substitute for yourself? Secured the Flymatic? That's funny. You, stupid creature, will trust your mechos and life to some strange, stupid gadget. Isn't that the paradox of the universe?

[Heroin in Inventory:B]
I'm trembling, and I feel Leepky's trembling far away! A barbarous Beeboorat appeared among our tender eLeeches. You must have sold your mind for a couple of beebs, vanger. Get lost, and take your cargo with you!

[Shrub in Inventory]
Here's a shrub. Have you learned now, my friend, how mean and cunning Beeboorats are? It could be you sitting there wrapped in rags, cursing your fate, and regretting that you didn't listen to Eleepods.

[Poponka in Inventory:G]
What's this I see? The vanger who can scare up a few popons for the thrifty Eleepods is honored! We, poets of the burrows, value various fables. I've read all my popons and have them hidden away. You brought me something new; today is my lucky day!

[Toxick in Inventory]
Your diligence is excessive, and you've come a long way in vain, carrying that stinking toxick and risking damage to your mechos. But you're pushy, I can tell. I hope to see some kusowocks from you soon...

[Kernoboo in Inventory]
Some dolt brought me some Nucleobooms... What am I going to do with this treasure? Feed it to the eLeeches? No, I'm afraid they would choke on them...

[Pipetka in Inventory]
A peeperette from Glorx? How interesting! What are you shipping this rubbish for, doltish wheeler? Looking for a place to plant it? I'll tell you what: no peeperette will grow on Fostral even if you stand on your head...

[WeeZyk in Inventory:G]
I hear the whole gamut of the pod! ProtoZeek came to Fostral! You've outwitted the saucy Zeexen and brought us a beautiful gift. The pods did not teach you life in vain, and now we are reaping the fruits of our efforts. Grand is the bios that had such good fortune!

[Eleerection Reject:B]
Aha, I still remember you. You're a thief and a scab! Sadness has settled in my scratchers since you stole my Stick from me. 
I suppose you want to take an eLeech? You've got it wrong, filthy piece of trash. What will my pod say when they find out who I trusted the jewel of Fostral to? Get lost, you motor bandit. Bring my Stick, then we'll talk...

[Palochka Return (Good):G]
Greetings to you, the hero who saved Feenger from the depths of boredom! Oh, my Paloch'ka, we are together at last, and this is the glorious vanger who brought us together. What a sweet joy! Take the beebs, honored wheeler, don't be shy. Today is my high day! 
I'll give you some secret knowledge for your trouble: go to the belt on Fostral where the Passage to Weexow is, because an underground crypt is there. It will be open to you from now on. Don't miss your chance...

[Palochka Return (Bad):B]
Well, I knew you'd be back with my Paloch'ka, because the anger of the pods razes the mounts to the ground and makes the Chain of Worlds quake. But we go easy on penitents. So, give me the thing (you know what) and regain the protection of Eleepods.

[Boorawchick in Inventory:B]
Aha, the thug has come to the scene of the crime! So, Boorawchick, you beeboorattish hellhound, today is not your day. The eLeeches are under close watch and you are in an iron jar! You, vanger, check the latches of your bay and the bolts, making sure the packaging is firm. 
You can't trust a scoundrel that looks around greedily, anxious for a wholesale slaughter... Get him out of the Temple of Wisdom, you're the very image of stupidity!

[Wormaster part note]
You are the real master of the rattly mechos, vanger. They heed you. You served Incubator well, you guarded us and brought us gifts. For that, I'll tell you a secret we've been keeping for ages. 
Learn now that Husker is a part of Wormaster. We believe that you'll do a lot for Eleepods when you assemble those dreadful machines.

[Last Moggy part note]
You are the real master of rattly mechos, vanger. They heed you. You served Incubator well, you guarded us and brought us gifts. For that, I'll tell you a secret we've been keeping for ages. 
The last Moggy will take Put-put to hit the dusty road and ramble around the worlds, scaring the next man and shaking the ground...

[Weexow visit]
Your superior bravery is only outweighed by your inherent stupidity. Why did you peek into Weexow, you rotten mechos filling? You've had enough of Fostral, wheeler? Well, well...

[Boozeena visit]
You came from Boozeena, I know. So, did you solve that puzzle of the gleaming symbols? Guess not. You're too inexperienced for that...

[Ark-a-Znoy visit]
Looks like it's been real torture, your stroll on sandy Ark-a-Noi... But you came back and I'm glad. We need dashing vangers like you!

[Khox visit]
Been tooling up and down the roads of Khox? You're the real master of the wheels, admit it! You have your swiftness and driving skills thanks to Eleepods.

[hMok visit]
You, who went down into the well of darkness, the wanderer enfolded in silence, tell me what you felt there, on the bare metal of hMok. The claws of fury? That's scary, so scary!

[Threall visit]
You've been to the world of raging flame? Where alien mana dwells in lava? What did the voice tell you, unlucky one? It didn't tell you to terminate me or Leepky, did it? No? There, my scratchers can relax. Phew...

[Eleepod in Inventory:G]
I see an Eleepod! My greetings to you, envoy of the pod! Say, did the rude wheeler insult you? You didn't bruise your scratchers, I hope? I've been worried sick about all the hardships on your way... But the nightmare is over and we'll write a poem about this adventure sometime!

[Beeboorat in Inventory:B]
I see a Beeboorat! You didn't expect to get here, you dastardly bandit? An end has come to your misdeeds. You won't chow down on infants anymore! I'll dissect you and make a 3D model for the course 'DANGER: Evil Beeboorat' to teach young eLeeches. And I'll write a dissertation on the same subject!

[Zeex in Inventory]
I see a Zeex! Okay, you featherheaded creation. You came here to set off a hot dispute, I guess? Fine! My pod is ready. We'll teach you the canons of poetry - your giggling at the universe is over!

[Ark-a-Znoy key]
You have subdued your mechos, you've jumped through hoops for Eleepods - well done, nimble fitter! We won't throw obstacles in your difficult way, instead we'll even help you. Now you'll be able to get to Ark-a-Noi, the cursed world. Here's the key.

[ruBeecation warning]
You've served us well, vanger, and the wet wasteland of Glorx is looming in the distance. But don't be afraid. Despite the evil and dullness of Beeboorats, we've figured out their secret. You'd better learn it: every vanger that falls into the clutches of these wicked beasts will be shorn like a lamb. 
He'll lose his mechos and get a raffa in exchange. Don't even think about peeking into the central escave or Lampasso. They'll capture you there and... 
A better way to go is by that ugly Beeboorat with the elongated snout... And dig a little there...

[Boozeena Code]
Your passenger is asking to give you a message, wheeler. Some nonsense: $(Boozeena Secret Code)... He asked that you remember this. But I'll give you some other advice: Leepky is your mentor, heed what HE says!

[Larvae Vision note:G]
You are so tough and nasty, you authoritative wanderer, that it has me quaking a bit. You are halfway down the road to glory. The secret Larva will now show up on your map, and you won't be mixing her up with anything else. She knows no routes, the whole world is hers...


-Incubator- Q&A

[mechos]
You are its slave from now on. The mechos is your servant - subdue it!
The machine of life and death. It can be ridden across worlds, on land or under water, or flown, or ridden underground...

[Fostral]
We are on Fostral now, on our world. You won't understand what I mean until you learn the nature of the Chain. Now go up and touch Fostral - your mechos is waiting.
Fostral is the world of the Eleepods and consists of five belts. Our escave, Podish, is on the first, bottommost belt. Incubator is on fifth, topmost belt. The second and fourth belts contain Passages, which you may have already noticed.

[Eleepods]
The Eleepods are your benefactors, you dung beetle. And I, Feenger, am one of them.
Eleepods are the head bios. We live on Fostral, and Podish is our escave. All the others will die out soon, but we will be here forever...

[Leepky]
You can't go wheeling around with a rusted mind like that, hearse rider. Leepky took good care of you...
Leepky is the big chord in my pod, my master. You've forgotten who Leepky is? You must have been in a fight and gotten your brains smashed in or something...

[Podish]
An escave of gracious Eleepods which lies underground. It's located on the bottom belt of Fostral...
You're lost, poor soldier. Go sell your mechos, then buy a wheelchair and go up. There you'll find Podish... and your grave.

[escave]
An escave is one of the bunches' underground nests, where we hide our treasure. Fortunately, Fostral has some escaves: the magnificent Podish and Incubator...
All of the bunches in the Chain live in escaves, the worlds' hidden cities. It's there you'll find the store where you can buy or sell goods or mechos...

[pod]
You're too dumb for that, son. Forget about them, they're not for you...
We Eleepods live in pods. That's all you need to know for now...

[bunch]
What bunch? You're not from any bunch. You're a beeb eater.
All bios have bunches, the communities we live in. For us, the bunches are everything, the meaning of life itself...

[The Chain]
The Lost Chain of Worlds...
Fostral is not the only world. There are others, too, and you can get to them through Passages. Our neighbors are Glorx and... no, that's enough for now.

[Larvae]
You are not ready for this. You are much too young for the Eternal Larvae.
What's a Larva? I wish I knew more about them. They are the Lords of the Chain, and I get excited whenever I hear about them. Bring us a Larva! Or at least get us some cirt from one...

[Beeboorats]
Arrogant creatures, a hundred times worse than Zeexen. They gobble our eLeeches and season them with nymbos, the vandals! Don't even think of visiting them. They'll wolf down any Eleepod if they get even a glimpse of his wet scratchers. But we'll teach them a lesson sometime!
Glorx is the world of the Beeboorats, creatures who don't deserve to live anywhere. You'd better stay away from them...

[Glorx]
Why do you want to know about Glorx? To you, it's nothing but a foul word!
There's a Passage on Fostral leading to Glorx. It's a world of water, dangerous for travelers, but unfortunately Glorx is the crossroads between all worlds, curse the builders of this Chain! And curse the Beeboorats with them, those hellspawn!

[raffa]
You better hold your tongue, spring chicken. You'll see them soon enough - there are a lot of them up there...
Can't say much about the raffa. The beasts are everywhere, setting traps for the Eleepods. I bet that you've noticed them. And that they've noticed you...

[Incubator]
Another lost fitter! Yeah, Fostral is a big place. What's Incubator? Where is it? It's around you, you wheeled shrimp, and I'm Feenger himself!
You are inside Incubator right now. Incubator is a crucial place for Eleepods, the place where eLeeches first come into the world.

[bios]
Bios? Our bios is the greatest, and all the others are nothing but dust...
There are currently three bios in the Chain: the Eleepods, Zeexen, and Beeboorats, those darn gluttons...

[cirt]
Cirt is all we need...
Find some and we'll buy it. But you've got to get one thing right: we will only take cirt from OUR Larvae...

[Feenger]
Feenger is me...

[Passage]
Passage? Where did you hear that word?
A Passage is how you get to other worlds. Fostral has many Passages, one into Glorx, for instance.

[Zeexen]
Zeexen? Ugh, what a terrible word! Looks like you're just here to annoy me, hearse rider...
Zeexen, Zeexen... strange creatures... We don't like them... Stay away from the Zeexen...

[eLeech]
An eLeech is a wonderful creature. You used to be an eLeech too, but not for very long.
eLeeches come into the world in Incubator. Any vanger who attempts to take an eLeech's life or ruins him during Eleection, deserves death himself...

[nymbos]
Your nymbos will never wake, rambler.
The Eleepods will pay you for shipping it from Podish to Incubator...

[Eleection]
This ritual is a foundation of Eleepod life! Study its rules...
You can take part in it, and if you win, you'll be rewarded. But take care of your eLeech, or else...

[vangers]
Who are vangers? And you're asking me, the counselor? Ugh, the kind of idiots I have to put up with!
YOU are a vanger, dolt. One of the contemptible slaves of the outside machines. You are all our servants!

[phlegma]
The blood of Incubator...
Mucus for the good of the Eleepods. We love to smear ourselves with it and plump ourselves up in the peace and quiet of our burrows...

[The Softie]
Ask the Zeexen, the tale-tellers. We don't like tales...

[The Cryspo]
Are you a vanger? Or a collector of tales about those who are long gone? Time for you to head up. They'll set you straight, the hard way!

[Necross]
We've never been there. Ask your vanger friends, if you have any. Or go there yourself!

[P-beam]
That's our secret - with it we can perceive the whole world as it is, regardless of distance. Fear us, scum, for we know all there is to know...

[Xplo]
Xplo... You're too curious, my friend. For now, it's nothing more than a word.

[Departed Bios]
Humph... One of the mysteries of the Chain. We don't really believe in them.

[Plump-up]
The beginning of the Eleepod rotation. Ecstasy for the pods, and abeyance for the elder chords. Floods of nymbos...

[Gulp-down]
The final stage of our sacral rotation. The eLeeches reach Podish and start to gobble sweetly, slowly absorbing the chord of the chosen one, who has been waiting for his eLeech while staying in the mind of the pod...

[beebs]
You are a slave to the beebs, you wheeled huckster. You'll kill anyone for the beebs! That's just your fate as a mercenary vanger.

[The Creature Soup]
Don't swear!

[The Clash]
That's a Zeexen tale. Go ask them!

[Spiral]
A mechos part, used to travel to other worlds through Passages. But remember: the Spiral doesn't last forever, so you must recharge it at a special station before you can enter a Passage...

[ruBeecation]
Ooh, that's a horrible Beeboorat rite. Every wheeler that falls into the claws of those filthy beasts has to go through it.

[Rubbox]
Don't peek into the Beeboorat escaves without a Rubbox. You'll lose your beebs and mechos in a flash! But Leepky collects those marks of universal stupidity...

[VigBoo]
You've visited the cursed VigBoo, the evil casemate and nest of the bandits? And you're still alive? Fate favors you, wheeler... That's where Eleepods go and disappear without a trace!

[Lampasso]
An escave on Glorx. The capital of stupid games. There you'll see what the Beeboorat are like.

[Ogorod]
An escave among water and silence. Life stands there in deep thought, trying to comprehend the extremes of dementia, but all in vain...

[Valorin]
Don't you dare bring it here, you stupid carcass. Once you're a slave of Beeboorats, you'd better forget the way to Fostral!

[shrub]
You can find calm, plump Beeboorats inside shrubs. They're no longer dangerous after eating their fill of humble pie!

[peeperette]
Peeperettes are rubbish from the Glorx, the rot that came down from the sky. Only the Beeboorats and their grungy existence need them.

[Nucleoboom]
A Nucleoboom can cheer up a Beeboorat, but around here it's nothing but garbage.

[Jablees]
Jablees are the spawn of the Glorx, the source of all rubbish and rot.

[Progress]
Just a set of weird sounds, nothing more.

[Heroism]
We don't care. The way of wisdom is beyond the Glorx.

[Election of the Castaways]
The only thing we know is that it's one of the Beeboorats' cycles.

[castaway]
The journey of a castaway ends in Ogorod, among the moldy peeperettes...

[PeepShow]
You should see the PeepShow if you want to see how worthless the Beeboorats really are...

[Nuclear War]
Hoards of dolts run after a Jablee, trying to steal its fruits...

[Geer'ah]
A Beeboorat who sits in Lampasso. Stuffed with straw and given a very ugly paint job. Bombastic and loud-mouthed.

[Boorawchick]
I guess you've met the pudgy beast, and I also guess it wasn't fun. He's the Beeboorats' top boss, the source of all that horror.

[Oboorez]
You'll find him in Ogorod. He's not that mean, but he's terribly dull-he has seen a lot but learned very little.

[The Buro]
The Buro strives to exterminate all Eleepods.

[Slave]
Unfortunately, you can't get out of Glorx without serving as a Slave first.

[Commissar]
You'd better ask that in VigBoo. They invented all that for their gain and the vangers' pain.

[Agent]
Once the Beeboorats start calling you an Agent, your deliverance is on its way. But you should keep your Rubbox, just in case...

[Manual]
The Manual is on Glorx, but here there is freedom for wise thoughts.

[ZeePa]
Necross is covered in bogs, but there are still escaves there. ZeePa is the most important, but you'd better think twice before going in there...

[B-Zone]
B-Zone is a Zeexen city. It's far away, but you should still visit it sometime.

[Zeephra]
Zeephra could talk about the Softie all cycle long, forgetting about everything else. But don't take the bait!

[Zeekatrix]
She's the greatest master of the art of cooking poisonous stuff.

[toxick]
Beeboorats fear toxick terribly. Just bring some to Glorx and you'll see for yourself how much it makes the evil beasts tremble...

[popon]
The poets of the burrows value the fruit of thought, no matter how feeble. But that foolish Zeephra thinks they want popons in B-Zone...

[ProtoZeek]
To bring kusowock from Necross here, use our sacred phlegma. Three jars will keep the precious thing from rotting when the cycles change.

[Spring]
The word means something to the silly Zeexen, but for us, it's just some stupid mumbling from the bogs...

[December]
This word is of little use to a vanger, and of even less use to us...

[Saturday]
Go to Necross to find out...

[Zeeklope]
Zeeklope is a big race. If luck is on your side, ProtoZeek is yours, but if not, you have to guess which rascal ended up with the valuable item!

[Weexow]
The stormy whirlpools get in the way of the one who has been chosen to find the Holy Grail.

[Boozeena]
You'll find some symbols are inscribed in a big circle, with a secret cave at their center. Hints which tell you what each symbol means are scattered throughout the evil jungle.

[Threall]
That strange, nearly incomprehensible symbol is your goal on Threall. If you should ever reach it, be ready for a real mind-quake!

[hMok]
A jar of liquid that can eat through steelwork will hasten your doom.

[Khox]
Just steer your mechos to where the arrows point, and you'll find what you want in the end. But be careful - much darkness lies along that precarious route...

[Ark-a-Noi]
Sand and stones, skull and bones. Comb this world well, and you'll find something to fill your cargo hold with.

[Protractor]
This will reveal the mystery of Xplo to you. The living entity that dwells in Spobs commands the Protractor, giving it its power.

[Mechanical Messiah]
The will of Threall dwells in this fiendish thing. The power of mysterious floods alters the world and all things in it. And so its owner's freedom is nothing but a temporary illusion...

[Function-83+]
This can take you to any world in the Chain which you have visited before.

[Chomper]
This fiendish thing originated in some dark series of events in the past. We have been unable to trace its history, as the deadly horror penetrates our consciousness, supplanting our very minds...

[Boot Sector]
The Boot Sector helps us understand both the real character of the vangers and their ultimate objective. And all traces lead to Threall...

[Flymatic]
This'll take your place in the outside world, wheeler.

[The Spectators]
That brook of theirs is a little tributary of the flood of Threall, which wrecks the fates of living beings and drives events to unprecedented extremes...

[The Infernals]
We are a little afraid of them. With our P-beam we can sense an alien mind on Threall, watching the other worlds and directing the other species. You'd better keep away from Threall, my youthful friend.

[Spobs]
The One Who Has Left has settled in the heart of Xplo. He fights against the unknown, for reasons also unknown.

[Parapheen]
The master of the Protractor. He has seen many things.

[Carmane]
The guard of the Chain, born of terror. Compared to him, we are but specks of dust.


VigBoo

[quotha]
Boorawchick is sleeping. Do not disturb him!

[Empty Question]
Question? What question?

[Empty Molecule]
Audience with Boorawchick refused. Leave the room immediately!

[Block Molecule:B]
Your sentence hasn't been read. Halt and listen!

[Out Molecule:B]
Get out, sad sack!

[Dead Molecule]
Dead Escave

[Boond ruBeecation:B]
To the Buro: Boorawchick reporting. Observed a fugitive mite. Initiating ruBeecation.
Slave! You are being put under the command of the Fugitive Vangers Enslaving Department. All of your property has been confiscated as illegally gained.
I am your esteemed Beeboorat instructor. I hereby label you with a Rubbox. Take care of it, as it's the color of our banner! Whoever loses it will be ruBeecated again.
Everything you do is totally controlled by the Buro. Always fear. Study the Manual.
Attention for orders! Drive Valorins to Lampasso. Disobedience is strictly punished. The Buro needs obedient Slaves.
To the Buro: The new Slave adapted. Boorawchick out.

[Commissar ruBeecation:B]
To the Buro: Boorawchick reporting. Observed a Commissar that lost the Buro's trust. Initiating ruBeecation.
Ex-Commissar! You dared bring shame upon your Rubbox! The Fugitive Vangers Enslaving Department is now taking charge of you. All your property has been confiscated.
I am your esteemed Beeboorat instructor. I'm re-registering your Rubbox. Take care of it, it's the color of our banner! 
Everything you do is totally controlled by the Buro. Always fear. 
Pay attention to orders! Drive Valorins to Lampasso. All your previous services have been annulled. The Buro doesn't favor slobs.
To the Buro: Conversion of Commissar complete. New Slave added to the heap. Boorawchick out.

[Agent ruBeecation:B]
To the Buro: Boorawchick reporting. An Agent arrived that doubted the integrity of the Buro. Initializing ruBeecation.
Ineffective Agent! Losing your Rubbox means losing the Buro's trust. You are being put under the command of the Fugitive Vangers Enslaving Department. All your property has been confiscated.
I am your esteemed Beeboorat instructor. I'm re-registering your Rubbox. Take care of it, it's the color of our banner! 
As usual, everything you do is totally controlled by the Buro. Always fear. 
Pay attention to orders! Drive Valorins to Lampasso. All your previous services have been erased. The Buro doesn't need experimenters.
To the Buro: Agent found to be insane. Started slavery therapy. Boorawchick out.

[Commissar Promotion:G]
To the Buro: Slave of advanced utility arrived. Data from other escaves verified. Starting registration.
Slave! You have been carefully following the regulations of the Buro and we are adding a new label to your Rubbox. You are now a Commissar.
Commissar! Your task is to participate in the Nuclear War and PeepShow and win. You'll get detailed instructions at the appropriate places from Geer'ah and Oboorez. Execute the order!
To the Buro: One Slave removed and one Commissar inserted into the heap by Boorawchick.

[Agent Promotion:G]
To the Buro: Observed a pushy Commissar. Data from other escaves confirmed. Starting registration.
Commissar! Information about your achievements in the Nuclear War and PeepShow has reached the Buro.
The Buro needs pushy vangers like you, nimble and silent. Listen to me, as I am your wise mentor. 
Your Rubbox has been switched to the status of Agent. From now on, you will carry out Beeboorat missions in other, sapless worlds.
The Passage to Necross is open. Get there immediately, find information about our power, and enter the Zeexen lairs at least three times. 
To the Buro: New Agent created by Boorawchick. For my good service to the Buro I'm requesting an increase in my allowance of Cirt Bunker.

[Boond Arrival]
To the Buro: Boorawchick observed a registered Slave in VigBoo. Checking subject's statistics... Slave! I hereby remind you of the feats you are to accomplish. 
Item 1: deliver Valorins to Lampasso. Item 2: deliver shrubs to Ogorod.

[Commissar Arrival]
To the Buro: Documented Commissar identified in VigBoo. Boorawchick reporting. Checking the subject's statistics...

[Agent Arrival]
To the Buro: Full-fledged, pushy Agent arrived. Boorawchick is getting in contact with the subject.

[Shrub in Inventory (Boond):B]
Slave! Shrubs must be shipped to Ogorod!
Slave! Ogorod is where you must ship the shrubs you have with you! Slave! What you have in your bay must be driven to Oboorez!
Slave! You must take to Oboorez what you have in your bay! 
To the Buro: Requesting an increase in my cirt allowance for the hazardous work, since Slaves are obtuse nowadays.
To the Buro: Requesting an increase in my cirt allowance for the hazardous work, since Slaves are obtuse nowadays.

[+Shrub in Inventory (Boond):B]
To the Buro: The newly arrived Slave has an IQ below the minimum. According to the instructions, exploitation of the slave is prohibited. 
Slave, by order of the Buro you are being put into the reserve of the Sports Events Commander in Lampasso... YOU ARE DEAD, DUNCE!!! 
A dried beeb was found in the IQ meter, something that caused a measurement error. The technicians to blame for this gross dereliction of duty were sent to Lampasso instead of you. At your expense... 
Praise the fair Buro! In honor of your providential escape you are assigned to learn by heart the new edition of the Manual with its additions and corrections. Your beebs will go toward publishing it.

[Heroin in Inventory (Boond):B]
Slave! According to the Buro's instructions, the final destination for Valorins is Lampasso. Don't forget!
I will report to the Buro if you come here again with Valorins. Actively fear.

[+Heroin in Inventory (Boond):B]
Slave! According to the Buro's decree entitled 'On Counteracting Sabotage during Sporting Events,' you are sentenced to death along with the confiscation of all your property. 
The Buro rides roughshod over its enemies! 
Slave! Listen to the latest news! Because of a Jablee crash near VigBoo the Buro is declaring a general amnesty for all offenders. Your beebs are confiscated and will be spent on printing fliers with popularized extracts from the Manual... For your own benefit!

[Pipetka in Inventory (Boond):B]
Slave! Everything you do is completely controlled by the Beeboorats. You are not allowed to collect or ship peeperettes.
A repeat offense will be punished by confiscation of your mechos. Return the peeperettes immediately!

[+Pipetka in Inventory (Boond):B]
Slave! Your actions could seriously impair the Buro's Castaway utilization procedures. Your mechos is being confiscated in favor of vangers who are quicker on the uptake.

[Kernoboo in Inventory (Boond):B]
Slave! Under penalty of forced conversion into a shrub I forbid you to touch the holy Nucleobooms!
Return them home quickly, you feeble, doltish midget, or else the Heroes' anger will be wild.

[+Kernoboo in Inventory (Boond):B]
Slave! Because of your outrageous insubordination, we ran short of Nucleoboom at the competition! This calamity has forced us to take strong measures. 
You are being put under the command of the Utilization Commander in Ogorod. 
A cipher just arrived from Ogorod about a lack of free places for the accommodation of shrubs. You got away with it this time, wretched Slave. Live on, but if you bring a Nucleoboom here one more time, I'll drown you with my own hands. 
Even donating all your property to the Buro, like you're doing today, will not save you.

[Shrub in Inventory (Commissar):B]
Looks like you decided to give the shrubs a ride in your mechos, Commissar? This is an irrational waste of work time! I am giving you a reprimand...
The Buro cannot develop such a nonstandard Commissar.

[+Shrub in Inventory (Commissar):B]
Wheeler! You have brought shame upon the grand title of Beeboorat Commissar. Your title does not allow for such a violation of work discipline! The Buro has sanctioned your demotion. 
Only hard labor will let you take your place among the Heroes.

[Heroin in Inventory (Commissar):B]
Consider yourself lucky, Commissar. Your mentor is in a good mood today, and I will not notice Valorins in your bay that should be in Lampasso!!!
Now go. Another mistake like that and you will be punished severely.

[+Heroin in Inventory (Commissar):B]
While the Heroes unceasingly prepare themselves for heroic achievements in the stadium, some Commissars, in violation of all instructions, infringe on the Valorin delivery schedule. Boorawchick, who is always on the ball, will take care of the rebel plot. 
To the Buro: Initiating demotion sequence for degraded Commissar. Boorawchick is keeping the minutes.

[Pipetka in Inventory (Commissar):B]
Commissar! You forgot the PeepShow Code. The rules of procedure forbid delivering peeperettes to VigBoo. You are to ship the cargo to Ogorod on receipt.
To the Buro: Obtuse Commissar identified. Sending his ID, requesting registration.

[+Pipetka in Inventory (Commissar):B]
Commissar! Your defiance of the rules ultimately turned out badly. The Buro is no longer able to allow the use of your mechos as a tool for a slob of a Commissar. 
To the Buro: Request to take control of the confiscated mechos for further exploitation. Registered by Boorawchick.

[Kernoboo in Inventory (Commissar):B]
Commissar! Nucleoboom must be in Lampasso before Heroism on Glorx ends. Think about the Heroes of Glorx. Hurry up!
To the Buro: Obtuse Commissar identified with critically low IQ and anti-hero disposition. Sending his ID, requesting registration.

[+Kernoboo in Inventory (Commissar):B]
Commissar! You are going to lose the Nuclear War, and no wonder: I can't remember ever seeing as bad a violation of instructions as this. The Buro is acting in strict accordance with the Manual. 
To the Buro: Initiating confiscation and demotion procedure for Commissar with anti-hero disposition. Boorawchick is keeping the minutes.

[Shrub in Inventory (Agent):B]
An Agent arrived. With a shrub. The Buro will hardly be happy about this. Well, I guess it's just the camouflage of an experienced Agent.

[+Shrub in Inventory (Agent):B]
Agent, why do you have shrubs in your bay? I ought to stop this violation of the Buro's instructions before it brings disaster. A Commissar with shrubs is a lesser evil. Hence, I congratulate you on your demotion. 
To the Buro: Initiating re-registration procedure for straying Agent. Security level 2. Boorawchick is keeping the protocol.

[Heroin in Inventory (Agent):B]
Agent! What are you doing with the Hero? Covering him with your body, so that he doesn't get hurt? That's commendable, but the instructions say nothing about that, got it? Check the Valorins in with the stylish Geer'ah and don't stray off any more.

[+Heroin in Inventory (Agent):B]
Wheeler! As the Buro's assignee for relations with Agents, I hereby annul your Agent's license. Your beebs are confiscated to compensate for the moral damage inflicted by your actions. To the Buro: I request an increase in my cirt allowance.

[Pipetka in Inventory (Agent):B]
Agent! The Peeperettes in your bay bolster the Buro's enemies. Your mission is to preach the power of Beeboorats in other worlds.
To the Buro: Brainwashed an Agent keen on peeperettes. Petitioning for an increase in my access time to the Cirt Bunker.

[+Pipetka in Inventory (Agent):B]
Agent, if you contribute the contents of your bay to my department, I will not pass your personal file on to the Peeperette Misuse Commission. Otherwise you're a dead fitter! 
To the Buro: Gave adjustment instruction to a Peeperette Misuser. Result is positive. I require more cirt!

[Kernoboo in Inventory (Agent):B]
Agent! According to the latest cipher from Lampasso, Geer'ah is in desperate need of Nucleoboom. Do you realize what that may cost you?
To the Buro: Watching a suspicious Agent. There are clear indications of conspiracy and sabotage.

[+Kernoboo in Inventory (Agent):B]
Wheeler! I have blown your cover! You are not an Agent, but a spy of Glorx's enemies trying to sabotage our sporting events! The Buro handles spies harshly: death to enemies! 
To the Buro: Exposed an enemy of Glorx! Petitioning for a promotion. I want Geer'ah's position. Boorawchick out. 
Agent! I have decided that granting your pardon will not be denounced by the Buro. I believe that you picked up the holy Nucleoboom and took it to me to save the precious seed from rotting or drying. 
This deed deserves a reward. For me, of course, your mentor. Your plunder is a humble reward for my pain.

[Nymbos in Inventory:G]
A wheeler brought nymbos. To the Buro: Vangers' pushiness keeps increasing due to Boorawchick's educational work. Boorawchick out.

[Phlegma in Inventory:G]
Phlegma... It's a plus for you, vanger, that you visit the sapless worlds, but have you completed your solemn duty on Glorx?

[Poponka in Inventory:B]
To the Buro: Confiscated popons from an irresponsible vanger. Carrying out further confiscation and investigation. Boorawchick out.

[Toxick in Inventory:B]
To the Buro: Alarm! Total mobilization! All personnel of the Buro must take cover! Our enemies sneaked toxick into VigBoo. Boorawchick, as usual, is on the ball and taking the appropriate measures!
Vanger! For your lack of vigilance, and for unintentionally aiding and abetting the enemy you deserve a demotion. Hand your Rubbox in for modification!

[eLeech in Inventory:G]
To the Buro: At the instruction of the loyal Boorawchick, a pushy vanger quickly delivered an eLeech. This great success was possible due to my wise mentoring. Boorawchick out. 
Vanger! The Buro will remember your services. Struggle on!

[WeeZyk in Inventory:B]
Oh, you brought a souvenir from rotting Necross! Garbage collector, do you know about the Buro's recent decree entitled 'On Counteracting the Pernicious Influence of the Sapless Worlds'? You risk getting into huge trouble!
However, I can give you advice on our fair laws for a reasonable fee...

[Kernowar Waiting?]
Commissar! Will you stay in VigBoo and wait for Heroism to go for Nucleoboom when the jablees fly up?
Yes, Boorawchick, I'll wait... 
It's time, the jablees have started sowing. Go for Nucleoboom now. The one who picks up the most Nucleoboom and brings it to Lampasso before the end of the cycle will gain the Buro's favor.
I don't need to wait, I'll manage myself... 
Don't miss your chance, Commissar.

[Pipiska Waiting?]
Commissar! Will you stay in VigBoo and wait for the Election of the Castaways to go for peeperettes?
Okay, Boorawchick, I'll wait... 
The cycle is here. Go pick up peeperettes and bring them to Oboorez. He'll be thrilled. 
That's balderdash, you doltish scab! I'll go... 
Well, well, Commissar. The PeepShow is coming up...

[Bad Cirt Delivery:B]
What did you drag your rotten mechos through, little cretin? Ah, I see. You brought alien cirt! You came to the wrong escave, you worm sprout... No, that's clearly sabotage aimed at hampering the work of the Buro! I'll check all your connections and contacts, scab!
What if I put YOU into a cirtainer and send it to Ogorod for planting? You deserve that. Next time watch where you pick cirt, you brainless pupa on wheels...

[Good Cirt Delivery:G]
To the Buro: Cirtainer delivered to my Cirt Reception Department. The sniff test confirmed the Beebooratness of the contents. 
The cirt has been registered and sent to the Distribution Department. Boorawchick out. My request for increased cirt allowance included. 
Vanger! Your push has risen to the rated level. As of today, you've brought us $(Cirt Delivery) portions of cirt. Continue harvesting!

[NO-Cirt Delivery]
Hehe, what did you fill your cirtainer with, dungler? With your brains, I bet, that your 'friends' beat out of you! There's no use for that stuff in your box... What I see is a lazy and dumb vanger who didn't find time to study the Buro's instructions for cirt harvesting and decided not to worry about it.
I'm afraid your exploitation, even as a slave, will trigger reasonable objections from some members of the Buro...

[MP0 Start]
Vanger! The VAN-WAR has started on Glorx! The pluckiest ones have started getting into it up there, and they're anxious to take your life. Go up and meet them, and try to take more than you give. Beeboorats like watching rumbles and gun fights, so don't disappoint us...

[MP1 Start]
Hey you, scavenger, the vangers have started the MECHOSOMA! You must deliver the predetermined amount of shrubs and Valorins. Load the cargo quickly, but take care that your crate doesn't collapse under the weight. The time of merchants and traffickers has come on Glorx; rock us with your carrying capacity.

[MP2 Start]
Hold the wheel tight, vanger! The PASSEMBLOSS has started! Show us how you can drive fast and throw your competitors into ditches. To help the dumb vangers, the route goes through checkpoints that are seen as glowing circles on the road. Don't mix them up with whirlpools!

[MP3 Start]
HUNTAGE started!

[MP4 Start]
MUSTODONT started!

[MP0 Comment]
Okay, yellow belly, the VAN-WAR is high! Get yourself a big gun, maybe you'll feel more confident then. You can still get at the jackanapes who dared take you on in his craggy buggy. Blow the scab up so that nearby bridges collapse and beebs fall legs up!

[MP1 Comment]
The MECHOSOMA is going full blast... Tired of shipping shrubs and Valorins, huh? That's all right, but isn't it a good way to save up for a new mechos? Show the others who's the best merchant on Glorx! And if a couple of oafs end up in the water, never mind. Only tough vangers can ship goods!

[MP2 Comment]
I know it isn't that easy to win the PASSEMBLOSS. The main thing here is to not go astray or skip a checkpoint in the heat of the moment. Remember, they are those glowing circles. If an oaf lingers in front of you, throw him into a ditch without hesitating. Speed is the name of the game!

[MP3 Comment]
HUNTAGE in progress...

[MP4 Comment]
MUSTODONT in progress...

[Larva 0 Note]
Agent, remember: the Larva responsible for Progress is temporarily residing in a zone of the Chain codenamed $(World of Larva0)...

[Larva 1 Note]
Agent, remember: the Larva responsible for the Election of the Castaways is temporarily residing in a zone of the Chain codenamed $(World of Larva1)...

[Larva 2 Note]
Agent, remember: the Larva responsible for Heroism is temporarily residing in a zone of the Chain codenamed $(World of Larva2)...

[Bad Larva Delivery:B]
Oh, I feel so bad... It seems the doom of Glorx has come. Oh, well, I've done my duty to the Beeboorats faithfully and I will face my death without fear... What's going on? I see nothing but a pile of garbage picked up by another pile of garbage!
What's going on? I see nothing but a pile of garbage picked up by another pile of garbage!
Hey you, pile of offal! You must know that a Beeboorat would rather convert himself into a castaway shrub than even look at an alien Larva! They'd rather tank themselves up with toxick or dry a fleshy eLeech than touch this underground filth!
I'm anxious to read out your sentence. For your outrageous transgression of the laws of the Buro and the principles of Beeboorats, and for your attempt to advocate Eleepod morals and Zeexen truths, you will be deprived of all your beebs.
They will be spent on the sanitation and disinfection of VigBoo, for road signs reading 'No entry with alien Larvae!', and for cirt for the victims of the assassination. Get out of here, scoundrel! And forget about Larvae forever!

[Good Larva Delivery:G]
Whee! It finally happened! The old dream of the common Beeboorats 
about the final settlement of $(Cycle Name of Locked Larva) came true.
Heroes dreamed of it as they died in the stadium; I dreamed of it when sending shrubs for correction; even the Buro dreamed of it when training Agents... And now, as our enemies started raising their heads, as clouds of dark plots started gathering above us, and as toxick was about to flow into the virgin waters of Glorx, a plain vanger came who was once given the shelter and care of the Buro.
All the plots of our enemies and traitors fail at once, and all that is left for them is to flop their scratchers in impotent anger and crash their popons against their popped eyes. 
Jablees flew high above Glorx again and Beeboorats thundered their loud NO to the plots of the sapless carcasses.
Jablees flew high above Glorx again and Beeboorats thundered their loud NO to the plots of the sapless carcasses.
How much effort and patience the legendary Boorawchick displayed in developing this committed fighter for the Beeboorats' cause. 
So many cycles passed before his nursling developed a firm love of the Manual and instructions, before it finally became possible to plan and implement this delicate operation. The strategic genius of Boorawchick and the outstanding push of an Agent nurtured by Boorawchick have brought happiness to the escaves of Glorx. March on, Agent, and make your way to great feats and accomplishments under the guidance of the Buro and me!
The Buro is giving us the highest awards! Boorawchick receives the All-Glorx Beeborat Award and a permanent pass to the cirt bunker. 
One of the rockslides of Glorx will be named after Boorawchick. Ten raffa offenders will be drowned in honor of me. 
You receive the Certificate of Participation in the 'Farewell to $(Cycle Name of Locked Larva)' operation. Be proud of that, Agent. You've had the good fortune to take part in an operation with Boorawchick! You are now a veteran vanger and will have something to write home about!

[Protractor in Inventory]
Stop right there, you dungler! Open your bay for inspection. Aha, I thought so: you acquired the Protractor from disloyal subjects. Not to discredit Boorawchick, I hope? Like, that he arranges picnics during working hours... This won't do!

[Mechanic Messiah in Inventory:B]
Freeze, culprit! You've come too close to the line of becoming a Buro-killer! The Mechanical Messiah in clumsy hands would do great mischief! 
I couldn't even put on my helmet as the Buro instructions require... Get out, you muff, and forget the way here!

[Function-83 in Inventory]
Brought Function-83+, huh? This object can inspire the Slaves with the idea to refuse the Buro's care. The Manual prescribes the confiscation of appliances like this.
However, I think that an eLeech secured with the help of this device will calm the Buro's censors. So I'll overlook this offense on behalf of the Beeboorats. Appreciate me, you piece of iron!

[Spummy in Inventory:B]
The time has come for the final test of my loyalty to the Buro. The renegade and criminal has brought the Chomper to VigBoo to inspire the Beeboorats with horror and distrust of the Buro. I'd like to go under cover, but I must stay at my post!
I must frustrate the enemy's plans of demoralizing Glorx and seducing Beeboorats off the right path. My valor is immense and my deed will never be forgotten! Attention! Orders! The vanger with the Chomper aboard must leave VigBoo before the end of the cycle!

[Boot Sector in Inventory]
Where in the bogs did you find Boot Sector, you piece of garbage? I thought it was buried forever. An Agent once served me who'd gotten himself eight mechos. The dodger wanted to violate the rules of subordination. 
Later he got completely mixed up with his motor pool and went nuts. The generous Buro gave him a rebuilt raffa and now he's shipping mail to earn his pension. That's what excessive push leads to.

[Peelot in Inventory]
Flymatic will drive you into a ditch or a whirlpool one day. I don't trust this doodad and you shouldn't either. A righteous vanger must oppose nature itself.

[Boorawchick absent]
Boorawchick is away on a trip to the provinces. The reception for personal affairs is canceled.

[Boorawchick Return (Good):G]
Vanger! The Buro acknowledges you for your excellent service as Boorawchick's driver. This is a great honor for you, as Boorawchick is the Beeboorats' most valuable asset after the Buro. 
However, to check on the progress of planned tasks, I must personally go on these risky trips, otherwise the other counselors will get out of hand. 
For your diligence I'm rewarding you by granting you access to one of the sealed Glorx stores near the Rig Station. Remember that the store and its contents is the property of the Beeboorats!

[Boorawchick Return (Bad):B]
I got you, you cursed traitor! You wretched piece of offal, how dare you leave your precious leader in a hostile environment? The Buro sat for many cycles discussing this situation... The disappearance of Boorawchick left Glorx on the brink of disaster! It was only thinking about the fate of the Beeboorats that gave me the power to reach VigBoo by myself, crawling through the hostile jungle. The damned beebs nearly gnawed me away! By offending me you offended all the Beeboorats. I was crawling and thinking about taking revenge on the ratfink who neglected his duty of guarding Boorawchick. Only your ruBeecation will wipe out this disgrace from Glorx and my medals.
The disappearance of Boorawchick left Glorx on the brink of disaster! 
It was only thinking about the fate of the Beeboorats that gave me the power to reach VigBoo by myself, crawling through the hostile jungle. The damned beebs nearly gnawed me away! By offending me you offended all the Beeboorats. 
I was crawling and thinking about taking revenge on the ratfink who neglected his duty of guarding Boorawchick. Only your ruBeecation will wipe out this disgrace from Glorx and my medals.

[Sandoll part note]
Vanger! By looking at your Rubbox I have concluded that your push is higher than it has ever been. We favor Agents like you. I'm going to tell you top secret information from our archive:
Cart is a spare part of Sandoll. Our Agents risked their lives to secure this data, so don't betray our trust in you and tell this secret to the sapless worlds!

[Last Moggy part note]
To the Buro: Observing a vanger with extraordinary push. According to the Manual he has access to security level 2 archives. Boorawchick is acquainting the subject with the materials. The non-disclosure agreement was not signed due to the illiteracy of the subject. Vanger, listen to Boorawchick! Putt-putt is a spare part of Last Moggy. Prove that you are qualified and return this mechos to the Buro's service.

[Weexow visit]
So did you find traces of the Buro's enemies there on Weexow? No? You should have searched better. Survey the bottom of the local reservoir thoroughly.

[Boozeena visit]
So, what do you think about Boozeena? The Buro supposes that the symbols in the circle are an insult to Glorx. This affair requires investigation and the villains must be punished for their disrespect...

[Ark-a-Znoy visit]
Give me some advice, Agent. The Buro is planning to set up a penitentiary on Ark-a-Noi for the Buro's enemies and my ill-wishers. Do you think it will be easy for convicts to escape from there? I agree, it's the right place for them...

[Khox visit]
Have you been to Khox? Good. This world neighbors Glorx. You must visit it often so that you can quickly detect any threat coming from that strange rubble...

[hMok visit]
You finally got to hMok, you piece of dung? Well, in that case the Buro washes their hands of you. Your education and mental health is up to you now. Don't forget to mention your cherished Boorawchick in your will.

[Threall visit]
What did you see there on Threall, you fried piece of garbage? Did you by chance hear any voices? If so, you must undergo a physical examination! These hallucinations are dangerous to an Agent's health!

[Eleepod in Inventory]
To the Buro: Operation to deliver an Eleepod to VigBoo for interrogation completed successfully. The culprit arrived under guard. 
The investigative commission under my command is beginning the examination of the suspect. Agenda: disposition of eLeeches and access codes to Incubator. Boorawchick out.

[Beeboorat in Inventory]
Aha, a delegation from the country has arrived... Have you come to ask for beebs to repair an escave? Or to get cirt with your coupons? We're short on it, comrade. All right, join the line, I'll see you when I have free time...

[Zeex in Inventory]
A new headache: a poisoner Zeex has come to VigBoo. You wicked enemy! Thought you'd catch us with our pants down? Don't even think of reading your popons in the escave! And don't scribble on the walls! 
Do your business and get out quickly, or else I'll put you into a cell to feed beebs and the Pact on a Permissive Environment for Passengers won't help you!

[Key to Boozeena Gift:G]
You've proven your loyalty to the Buro and personally to Boorawchick. We can entrust you with our secret: I'm giving you the key to Khox, a neighboring world. Now you'll be able to visit it now and then and signal us if you find our enemies.

[Zyklope warning]
Agent, the growth of your utility to the Buro exceeds all the Statistics Department's forecasts. We don't want to lose such a useful Agent, so you will receive instructions on the tactics to use on Necross shortly. 
You must not under any circumstances peek into ZeePa before you visit B-Zone!

[Hideout Open]
Agent! For your achievements in the struggle against the enemies of the Buro you are assigned to conduct an audit in one of the Buro's underground sealed stores. It was built in case of war with the cunning Zeexen. 
It's near the residence of Geer'ah and stocked for the accommodation of an important counselor in case of emergency.

[Larvae Vision note:G]
To the Buro: Your request on the Dominance level of this vanger is confirmed. Current status: category A50. Analysis carried out by Boorawchick... Vanger, your push, as it was predicted by the Buro, allows you to get in direct visual contact with a Larva. 
Watch its movement on the map integrated into your mechos. You can start purposeful cirt harvesting activity. I hereby commend you.


-VigBoo- Q&A

[mechos]
Mechos is the Buro's equipment. It's entrusted to you for the time of your service.
A vanger must know everything about his mechos.
A machine for inter-bunch communication and for carrying out the Buro's missions.

[Fostral]
Fostral is beyond you, vanger. You serve Glorx, so serve well and don't get distracted.
It's been too long since I've heard about any of your achievements from Geer'ah or Oboorez. You serve the Beeboorats, not the Eleepods.
Fostral is a world of sticky Eleepods. There's a Passage on Glorx that ends up on Fostral. You must visit it sometime.

[Eleepods]
Dumb beasts. Maybe a little bit more clever than you. There's something in you that resembles Eleepod spawn.
Extra-fat beasts. They make their stink on Fostral. Commissars are not allowed to contact them.
A product for a Beeboorat's digestive tract. The work among the Eleepods is an important mission for the Buro. If you get us a worm, you'll be rewarded.

[Leepky]
Inquiry ignored.
The main enemy of Glorx. You'd better gain some experience before asking about him.
Leepky is the Eleepod commander. He's rather cunning. According to other Agents, he keeps some suspicious objects hidden in his burrow. You need to investigate this.

[Podish]
Podish is far, Boorawchick is near, and the Buro is everywhere! Work hard and fear, slave!
The main Eleepod hole. For their own safety, Commissars are not allowed to come close to Podish.
The oldest escave in the Chain of Worlds. And the most vicious. Inhabited by the extremely wily Eleepods. Be careful there, Agent.

[escave]
Vangers and beebs are not permitted to enter escave. They are only allowed in the holding area.
We live in escaves and store our treasures there. So why do you want to know?
The Buro invented escaves to defeat our enemies' plot to conquer the Beeboorats.

[pod]
This word is in the forbidden list. You can't use it in escaves.
Don't make me angry! I stand for Beeboorat interests.
Pod is the Eleepod terrorist organization. We do all we can to resist it!

[bunch]
The Beeboorat bunches are raising you. Be grateful and diligent.
I, Boorawchick, govern the bunch of Beeboorats in VigBoo. That's why our bunch is the most authoritative on Glorx.
All bios in the Chain are concentrated in bunches. The Beeboorat bunches are the main ones.

[The Chain]
Glorx is in the center of the Chain. That's all that Slaves are permitted to know.
The Chain is Glorx plus a few other worlds. The Passages connect them.
Glorx, Fostral, Necross, Xplo and a few abandoned worlds comprise the Chain. The Buro wants to control all of them.

[Larvae]
Inquiry completely ignored. To Buro: request information about overcurious Slaves.
This information is unavailable to Commissars, in the interests of Beeboorat security.
Larvae are everything to all bios. It's thanks to the Larvae that cycles change, Heroes perform exploits, and castaways pay for their crimes. Larvae live deep under the ground, beyond our reach. But the Buro overcomes these difficulties by... Hmm, enough said.

[Beeboorats]
We Beeboorats are the pride of Glorx, the dread of Fostral, the rulers of beebs, the favorites of the Larvae, and the adornment of the Chain. Isn't that enough?
I, Boorawchick, am an exemplary Beeboorat, authorized by the Buro!
This Agent is suspiciously forgetful about whom he serves. To Buro: Observing an Agent with low loyalty.

[Glorx]
You're plowing the roads of Glorx, the best world in the Chain.
Glorx is the adornment of the Chain of Worlds.
Glorx is the wettest of the worlds. Preach the greatness of Glorx everywhere!

[raffa]
Rebels! The Buro is preparing a decree commanding their total and unconditional exploitation.
Degenerates that don't respect the Buro. They interfere with our operations.
Don't have any dealings with them, Agent. You've got other responsibilities.

[Incubator]
The main Eleepod escave. A Slave doesn't need this information.
The place where Eleepods are born. This top-secret information was delivered by the Buro's Agents.
An Agent's mission is to keep a good watch over Incubator.

[bios]
You are not tied to any particular bios, so the Buro limits the time you may spend in escaves.
All bios obey Larvae, and the best bios is Beeboorats. They obey Larvae and the Buro. Therefore the others are insignificant.
Three bios have been fixed in the worlds of the Chain: Eleepods, Beeboorats, and Zeexen. There are some rumors going around about the Departed Bios. This information is of interest to the Buro.

[cirt]
I'm hereby notifying you of the Buro's decree: To avoid mixing up different sorts of cirt, Slaves are not permitted to bring any rectangular objects that they find on worlds into escaves.
Were it not for cirt, Progress wouldn't happen, the Election of the Castaways would never start, and the time for Heroes' exploits wouldn't come. Time would stop and life would become impossible.
Cirt is soil collected from the place where a Larva once was. Each Agent's primary mission is to find these places and collect the cirt.

[Feenger]
With curiosity like that you'll be hanging around with the castaways in Ogorod pretty soon!
A piece of Leepky.
Go to Incubator and you'll see for yourself.

[Passage]
Slaves are not permitted to come close to Passages, to prevent their being spoiled or plugged up.
Passages connect worlds. The Buro knows the secret of traveling through Passages.
A vanger's mechos can go through a Passage into anther world.

[Zeexen]
Contact with the Zeexen leads Slaves to treachery. Forget about them!
Inhabitants of Necross, wannabe fliers, with evil tongues and no morals.
A headache for the Buro. The Zeexen from their upper escave are hatching a plot to poison the Buro and its counselors. Go there and defeat the scoundrels' plot.

[eLeech]
Just get it, wheeler! Here is its description: wrinkled, big head, distinct Eleepod smell.
A product of Incubator. The Buro's analysts have identified him as an immature Eleepod. He's valuable.
Many of our Agents have died trying to capture and deliver an eLeech. By now, the Buro and its counselors have forgotten what an eLeech tastes like...

[nymbos]
The Buro has waved your request aside.
When an eLeech isn't available, the Buro chows down on nymbos.
Attention, Agent! Your curiosity oversteps the Buro's general boundaries for Agents.

[Eleection]
Boorawchick feels sick from this word.
The dumb Eleepods couldn't manage Progress or Heroism, so they have the Eleection.
If you ever happen to be on Fostral during the Eleection, stay sharp.

[vangers]
The dregs of the bios. Only the wise Buro could find a use for them, earning even more praise for the Beeboorats.
Most vangers rust on the worlds. Only the best become Agents and deliver cirt.
The Buro only recently recognized the vangers' usefulness.

[phlegma]
Why do you need phlegma? To grease your mechos? Don't ruin the Buro's equipment!
The crummy Eleepods can only lie in phlegma.
I don't need phlegma. Geer'ah knows what it's used for - the Heroes in the stadium tumble about in the slime!

[The Softie]
Start picking up Valorins immediately!
According to our information from the Zeexen, the Softie are somehow connected to Fostral.
The Buro believes that all the Passages were built by the Softie. The Agents' mission is to find traces of them. The Buro wants to build Passages also.

[The Cryspo]
Where did you hear about the Cryspo, stupid Slave?
The Cryspo once ruled the whole Chain of Worlds.
The Buro's analysts believe that Cryspo is another name for the Softie.

[Necross]
A source of stink and mold. The most appropriate place for worthless slaves.
Necross is a big world inhabited by Zeexen. One big rebel lair in one big swamp!
Necross is a worse place than Fostral! There is unverified information about a buried Passage on Necross. No one has actually seen it, but the Buro is quite interested in any information about it.

[P-beam]
Repeat your question louder. To Buro: Boorawchick has been provoked. Keeping cool and alert.
The shadow of the Eleepods' plot. Alas, Commissar, we are all in danger.
The P-beam is a gang of cunning Eleepods. Using the P-beam, they can see anything in the Chain. The Buro is raising lots of Agents so that they don't catch us unguarded.

[Xplo]
You speak about Xplo but can't even get to Ogorod!
A feeble Commissar wants to know about the world of shifting sands? Better go get to work at PeepShow!
The fourth inhabited world. No one can get into its escave. According to the available information, a magical device is needed to get there. Nothing else is known.

[Departed Bios]
They were too lax with their slaves, which ruined them. But that's not a threat to us.
They left lots of horrible weapons, and their disappearance is a mystery. 
The Buro knows that this bios once aimed to gain full control over the Larvae, and it seems they succeeded.

[Plump-up]
Don't spoil the Boorawchick's home!
Eleepods plumped up from stupidity. But Commissars are just as stupid!
Agent! About face!

[Gulp-down]
To Buro: Requesting information about free space in Ogorod. Need urgent deactivation of an insane Slave.
An Eleepod cycle. The Beeboorats have no interest in it.
I order you not to go to Fostral anymore. It has a bad effect on you!

[beebs]
Beebs will even save an abject slave. But for what?
This is what the Cryspo looked like. Probably.
We know more about this than the others. For you, it's a reward.

[Creature Soup]
The Buro tries its best to erase these rumors. But crummy slaves will dig this nonsense up anyway. What a shame...
Enemy propaganda. The Zeexen broadcast this stuff.
What I'm going to say will really bother you! According to the Zeexen accounts, the Eleepods and Beeboorats came from the Creature Soup.

[The Clash]
Hmm, you found the Zeexen tablets on Glorx, huh? Shall I remind you about the Manual? There are only two things a Slave needs to know about: Valorins and shrubs!
Something from long ago. The Buro has no interest in it.
Some of our weapons come from the time of the Clash.

[Spiral]
Unfortunately we can't take your spiral out of your mechos, scoundrel. Forget about it until we explicitly mention it.
You ought to know better.
Different mechos have spirals of different sizes. You can't get into some of the worlds if you only have a little one.

[ruBeecation]
ruBeecation is your initiation into the Buro's activity. The most important event in your life. All vangers without Rubbox are subject to ruBeecation.
We cure lazy Commissars with ruBeecation. Once they try on Slave gear, they all understand the wisdom and kindness of the Buro.
ruBeecation of an Agent is an extreme measure. The sapless worlds sometimes affect our servants so badly that they lose their minds and become unsuitable for any position but that of Slave.

[Rubbox]
The Buro exterminates unregistered vangers. You are lucky and are now registered as a Beeboorat slave. Your Rubbox certifies this. From now on, your every step is recorded and evaluated. Losing your Rubbox will lead to deplorable consequences.
Your Rubbox tells me whether to degrade you or whether to promote you to Commissar. Your Rubbox is you. No Rubbox, no you.
An Agent that hasn't learned what a Rubbox is yet? Guess that's because of all that shaking and moisture. He's forgotten that he was once a Slave!

[VigBoo]
Here in VigBoo you start your difficult yet honorable service to Beeboorats. It's here you must load Valorins and shrubs and ship them to their respective destinations.
In VigBoo, you can find Boorawchick and learn about our laws and the Manual of the Buro.
The Beeboorats' stone citadel.

[Lampasso]
Remember the main rule, Slave. Lampasso is an escave in the upper part of Glorx. It's where the stadiums are, where the Heroes perform their feats. It's there you must deliver the Valorins which you collect here.
The stadium is in Lampasso. Commissars bring Nucleobooms to the stadium. If you haven't learned this yet, I'll have carry out ruBeecation again!
If you've forgotten this, don't try to recall it. The stylish Geer'ah will restore your memory.

[Ogorod]
The edge of Glorx, on the bottom of the world. Now you'll deliver shrubs there after you get them in the store here. But if you don't do your job, soon you'll be getting to know Ogorod from the inside!
The place where, by the order of the Buro, we exploit shrubs and dull vangers. You deliver peeperettes there. By the way, do you know what peeperettes are?
Many fat beebs live near these. But a determined Agent can always earn some money by carrying out the Buro's missions!

[Valorin]
You only need know two things: their source and their destination. You take Valorins from here and deliver them to Lampasso.
The chosen one. His feats establish the Beeboorats' glory among all the weaker bios.
It's thanks to the Heroes' feats that the Beeboorats exist!

[shrub]
Shrubs must be taken from VigBoo to Ogorod. A Slave will never become a Commissar without first working as a shrub-shipper!
Rejected by the Buro, this is the last refuge for peeperettes.
The Buro has received information that Eleepods are using our shrubs against us.

[peeperette]
Peeperettes fall from the sky. They're only for Commissars.
Remember this description. Color: dark. Source: Jablees. Found on the roads of Glorx during the Election of the Castaways. Must be picked up and shipped to Ogorod.
Important items. Punishment for castaways.

[Nucleoboom]
The stylish Geer'ah will go crazy if he finds Nucleobooms in your cargo hold. Watch what you pick up!
The Heroes will not accomplish their feats without Nucleobooms, so gathering Nucleobooms is a Commissar's primary mission. Wait for Heroism, when you'll get additional instructions from Geer'ah.
Nucleobooms and peeperettes are related.

[Jablees]
Jablees watch over lazy, dull slaves. Yes, your every step is under the control of the Buro!
They show up during Heroism and the Election of the Castaways and disseminate Nucleobooms and peeperettes, respectively. Don't try to shoot them. They fly too high.
Jablees are the pride of the sons of Glorx. When they fly high above us, we are filled with courage and valor.

[Progress]
That's when we decide what to do with slaves.
Boorawchick reports to the Buro about all work completed.
It's time for appointments and promotions in the Buro!

[Heroism]
The Nucleoboom harvest. Slaves must not interfere with the Commissars' business!
Jablees sow Nucleobooms on Glorx. A good chance for you to distinguish yourself, Commissar. But remember that Nucleobooms will not survive into the next cycle. Don't linger. Ship your harvest to Lampasso! Then Geer'ah will announce the winner of Nuclear War.
Inquiry ignored.

[Election of the Castaways]
The peeperette harvest. Slaves must not interfere with the Commissars' business!
The Buro arranges the PeepShow for Commissars during this cycle. Place: roads of Glorx. Objective: peeperettes. Destination: Ogorod.
Go take a look around Ogorod, Agent. You'll remember it right away. But take care not to stay there forever!

[castaway]
You're risking some unpleasant, direct experience in Ogorod, Slave.
Alas, Commissar, not only do our enemies surround us, but there are enemies on the inside, too. And they are even more harmful. The Buro successfully roots them out.
Leepky likes our castaways.

[PeepShow]
If you work well, Slave, you'll get to see the amazing PeepShow.
A Commissar's first element. The intense harvesting of peeperettes! Oboorez will tell you the rules.
The Buro organizes the PeepShow so that the castaways receive proper punishment.

[Nuclear War]
A careless Slave can be accidentally squashed in Nuclear War.
The reaping of the holy Nucleobooms, which are then delivered to the brave Heroes. You'll get instructions from the officer responsible for sports - Geer'ah.
Beware, Agent! If not for Nuclear War, many Heroes wouldn't get their Nucleobooms. The Buro would never allow this.

[Geer'ah]
Geer'ah compels observance of and obedience to the Buro's Manual. Don't goof up in front of him. Bring Valorins to Lampasso, and try not to complain.
The officer in charge of sports events, a post of great responsibility. He resides in Lampasso.
The stylish Geer'ah, the hope of all the Beeboorats.

[Boorawchick]
I'm Boorawchick. It's thanks to my kindness that you've got the opportunity to work for Beeboorats. Be faithful and obedient. I'm keeping an eye on you!
The Buro tells you its decisions through Boorawchick. Hey, don't dig in my burrow! To Buro: I request the cracks in my office be plastered, for my security.
Boorawchick is the one who got bored with your stupid questions.

[Oboorez]
He'll receive shrubs from you in Ogorod. Remember that I'm in communication with him.
The officer responsible for the exploitation of shrubs. He is in charge of peeperettes and the PeepShow. Inclined to garbage collection.
Old and stupid. He is loyal to the Buro, however.

[The Buro]
The Buro is concerned about the purpose of your existence. Don't disappoint the Buro.
Buro is the power and wisdom of the Beeboorats and the godfather of worthless vangers.
I am the Buro.

[Slave]
A shabby wheeler who has just started his service to the Buro to repay the honor the Beeboorats have done him by registering him.
Unsuccessful wheelers. You became a Commissar thanks to your hard work, but failure to observe the Manual will make you a slave again.
Some of them are Agents that have lost their Rubbox.

[Commissar]
Commissar is the next level of your service.
Commissars take part in PeepShow and Nuclear War.
We value Agents more than Commissars.

[Agent]
If a Slave asks about Agents, it's probably a good Slave. Serve us well and you'll know everything soon enough.
I guess it will take you a long time to rise to the rank of Agent!
The hands of Glorx in other worlds.

[Manual]
The Buro devised the Manual so that you wouldn't just ramble over the worlds filling your brain with worthless thoughts. Bless fate for giving you the Manual.
Whoever follows the Manual strictly will rise to the rank of Agent quickly!
Without the Manual, Beeboorat life would be impossible.

[ZeePa]
Zeexen's main escave. Many of our best Agents disappeared in ZeePa.

[B-Zone]
B-Zone is the nest of those Zeexen-poisoners. The Buro has sent many Agents there, but so far all in vain...

[Zeephra]
Zeephra is the counselor of ZeePa. She is a very dangerous enemy and is hatching a plot against the Buro. Some say she eats Beeboorats!

[Zeekatrix]
Zeekatrix is the counselor of B-Zone. She is preparing a poison for Beeboorats, but the Buro will get her!

[toxick]
Don't say that, wheeler! Don't you know that the Zeexen are preparing toxick to kill me? The fiends cook the poison in B-Zone and spread it over all the worlds. Try to defeat their plot and I'll reward you!

[popon]
Zeephra prepares the popons. She is Zeekatrix's accomplice in their dark plots. These tablets may very well contain the recipes of dreadful poisons!

[ProtoZeek]
An unknown object. Seems like the Zeexen in B-Zone mix toxick with it to make it more poisonous.

[Spring]
Zeexen are crazed about the Softie and all that stuff. Guess that's why these stupid words get into their stupid heads.

[December]
Find it out yourself. That's what the Buro raised you for.

[Saturday]
According to the reports of some Agents, this is the time the Zeexen have scheduled their final assault against the Beeboorats. They're going to pour thousands of jars of toxick onto Glorx.

[Zeeklope]
It has been established that Zeephra sometimes sends vangers to B-Zone with instructions. This is called Zeeklope. Take part in this event and find out what it's about...

[Weexow]
Better ask the Eleepods. The Buro hasn't found anything important in that world.

[Boozeena]
If you're smart, you can try to get a key to the hideout on Boozeena. If you succeed, the Buro will reward you.

[Threall]
An Agent once served me, a good example Agent for everyone. Then he visited Threall and came back scared to death. Since then, he's remained stupid and never leaves Glorx. I had to degrade the blockheaded Agent to Commissar...

[hMok]
A world made of iron, with a hideout on the lower level. Remember that this information is secret! The Buro has declared hMok a hostile and illegal world.

[Khox]
To get out of Khox, you must be able to handle your mechos better than any Agent. Any lingering on the roads of Khox is fatal!

[Ark-a-Noi]
By some accounts, Ark-a-Noi looks like Xplo. There's nothing there except death.

[Protractor]
According to our quick-look data, the Protractor is closely related to Xplo and the local escave. Your mission is to investigate this criminal connection.

[Mechanical Messiah]
It has been firmly established that there is a connection between this object and the mysterious voices on Threall. Any vanger who gets the Mechanical Messiah is pulled out of the Buro's control, so take care!

[Function-83+]
This object would be of great use to our Agents. With it, they could grab many eLeeches from the Eleepods.

[Chomper]
Anyone who picks up Chomper disappears quickly, and no one ever finds even a trace of him!

[Boot Sector]
The Boot Sector is not recommended for Agents. The Buro is not responsible for any mechos left unattended and will not accept any claims.

[Flymatic]
A vanger's home-made gadget. I'm not interested.

[The Spectators]
According to Zeexen assertions, these are creatures from the time of the Clash. These are evil rumors which undermine the Buro's authority.

[The Infernals]
The Eleepods believe that the Infernals rule all the worlds. Isn't that nonsense? Everyone knows that the Buro is the ruler here!

[Spobs]
Someone from Necross claims it's an escave on Xplo. It's true that there is some rubble there, but nobody has ever managed to get inside.

[Parapheen]
The Buro has long been awaiting its chance to encounter him and find out if he's eatable!

[Carmane]
They call Carmane the boss of the Infernals. Someone sort of talked to him once. Well, after the horrors of Threall, some strange voices have been intruding into the heads of vangers.


-Lampasso-

[quotha]
Geer'ah is busy. Get lost, rambler!

[Empty Question]
Messed your pants, huh? Lost your tongue, you bubbling clot of mucus? Right, fear Geer'ah...

[Empty Molecule]
I'm getting tired of you, you hunk of metal. Why don't you just get out?

[Block Molecule:B]
You are bold all right. Geer'ah is broadcasting: halt and listen!

[Out Molecule:B]
Get out of here!

[Dead Molecule]
Dead Escave

[DEAD w/o Rubbox:B]
Ha! What luck: a fugitive slave showed up... Without his Rubbox, slob!
Hi, duffer! Thanks for visiting Geer'ah. He'll give you a job. The Heroes are taking to the field soon, and you will help them.

[Kernowar Win (Boond):B]
A Slave's win in the Nuclear War means there is a flaw in our education system. Boorawchick will get an admonition! I ought to execute you, but I'll give you a chance to redeem yourself.

[Kernowar Participation (Boond):B]
You dared to come with Nucleoboom, Slave! A single touch from you will befoul Nucleoboom forever. You're on the list of the Buro's enemies. Another offense and the Heroes will kick your head around the stadium.

[Kernowar Win (Commissar):G]
Commissar! On this momentous occasion I would like to congratulate you on your win in the Nuclear War! Your bravery is comparable to that of the Heroes in the stadium.
Boorawchick has received confirmation of your success. The Buro is preparing the documents for your advancement.

[Kernowar Participation (Commissar):G]
Sacred Nucleoboom for brave Heroes! This is the meaning of your service and your otherwise useless life. The Heroes will thank you, the humble worker who enabled their victory!

[Kernowar Win (Agent)]
Agent, you are wasting your energy and my patience. You won the Nuclear War, but that's for slow Commissars. The Buro defined the purpose of every mite, and they know better how things are meant to be.

[Kernowar Participation (Agent)]
You decided to wait in the rear and ship Nucleoboom, you scabby, feeble Agent? While the brave Heroes are performing deeds of valor in the stadium?
You'd prefer the rank of Commissar, huh? I'm writing a detailed report to the Buro about your 'feats.' I'm sure the decision regarding your demotion will soon follow.

[Boond Arrival]
A Slave arrived. They are all miserable slaves...

[Commissar Arrival]
Commissar! I'm Geer'ah, your big brother. I'm the one who takes care of you.

[Agent Arrival]
My greetings to you, Agent! Is there anything Geer'ah can help you with?

[Shrub in Inventory (Boond):B]
Slave, your monkey tricks make me laugh! This is Lampasso; Geer'ah is here and shrubs aren't my business! Turn your crate around and get out of here and into Ogorod!

[+Shrub in Inventory (Boond):B]
Slave! You are obstinate in your error. You disappointed the Buro and they declared your existence meaningless. I am assigned to carry out the appropriate procedure. 
However, the merciful Buro is giving you a chance to die and wash away your guilt. You will take part in the Competition! 
Dear Slave, a message just arrived about a new record in the Zeppelins competition. The hero produced such a powerful pop that it caused a series of rock slides that blocked three approaches to the stadium. This is great news! I am granting you a pardon: live on for the benefit of the Buro. Your property, however, is confiscated to reward the hero.

[Heroin in Inventory (Boond):G]
Handle Valorins with care, you clumsy freak!

[Pipetka in Inventory (Boond):B]
Haw-haw, the zealous mite brought me peeperettes. You're getting on my nerves! Listen, you crummy grub, our Heroes don't need peeperettes! This is a famous place and I won't let you dirty it!
Drive the peeperettes to Ogorod! If Oboorez doesn't report your arrival to me soon, our fury will get at you wherever you are.

[+Pipetka in Inventory (Boond):B]
The scabby Slave came with peeperettes again! You didn't heed our instructions and ignored the Manual. Well, we'll show you the purpose of peeperettes. I just wish the seeds weren't wasted on a scab like you. But at least this is going to be a lesson to other slaves! 
All right, you dumb creature, live on - today is your lucky day. A message from VigBoo just arrived about a planned shipment of Valorins. All available Slaves must get down to loading and shipping. Get over there quickly. I'll empty your bay so that it has more room for cargo.

[Shrub in Inventory (Commissar):B]
Commissar! We weren't expecting anyone with shrubs here. Don't expect a warm welcome. Your stumble may screw up our sporting events!
I'll send an inquiry to the Buro to check your personal file.

[+Shrub in Inventory (Commissar):B]
Your crimes against the Beeboorats have exhausted all patience. Your promotion to Commissar was definitely premature. However, the Buro can correct their mistake: hand in your Rubbox, you've brought enough shame upon it!

[Heroin in Inventory (Commissar):G]
Commissar, you're always welcome here with Valorin. Work hard, but remember that the Heroes need Nucleoboom... Don't make them wait too long!

[Pipetka in Inventory (Commissar):B]
The Commissar brought a peeperette. The stylish Geer'ah is stunned! Slipshod Commissars like you could ruin the Beeboorats to the joy of our numerous enemies. Think better of it before it's too late!

[+Pipetka in Inventory (Commissar):B]
You must've stolen your Rubbox, scoundrel! The Beeboorats' Commissars have never been so stupid: the Buro keeps close tabs on them! Get lost, Slave! Go wash away your guilt!

[Shrub in Inventory (Agent):B]
I must've lost my vision, what with all this heavy duty. Pink elephants and now Agents with shrubs... But I KNOW this can't be. Begone vision!

[+Shrub in Inventory (Agent):B]
The worst guest is an Agent with a shrub. It's a pity... Your gripe is with the Beeboorats... Guess that's because of your idleness. But it can be fixed. Commissar, you now have many things to do.

[Heroin in Inventory (Agent)]
I'm always glad to get Valorin... But not from an Agent! In these rugged times our best soldiers waste time on trifles. It makes me bitter just thinking about it...

[Pipetka in Inventory (Agent):B]
A brave Agent brought a trifling peeperette. An odd case... Let's take a look at your Rubbox. Well, well... The Agent is new and green. Okay, since it's your first time I'll just give you a reprimand.

[+Pipetka in Inventory (Agent):B]
An Agent with a peeperette again! And with a reprimand on his Rubbox! The Agent failed! It's a disaster, we must remove all traces! My duty is to liquidate the loser Agent! 
All right, I've been too hasty. Your medical file has just been brought from VigBoo. It appears you're overworked and got hung up on peeperettes. Live on, poor thing. I'll take your belongings and you go have some carefree fun. Maybe you'll calm down...

[Sports Introduction]
Well, wheeler, it's time to tell you about our rites, or else you will perish in the darkness. The feats of our brave heroes are the cornerstone of Beeboorat existence and are performed in the stadium under my guidance. 
The valor of our heroes is high, and so is their glory. Stylish Geer'ah is only a humble helper to those who host the competitions. Here are some of them.

[B-Sport 00]
The Breakneck Rush competition opens the season, and spectators just love it. Listen and remember. Here are the rules: 
The fearless hero rips off his head and the referee replaces it with a sacred Nucleoboom. Even with this inconvenience, the hero must reach the finish line without  letting the Nucleoboom fall. 
Only a few are able to do this, but their names are engraved on the Stone of Fame forever.

[B-Sport 01]
Listen, you wretched little scrub, and admire the utter bravery of the heroes who take part in Gorodki. Here are the rules: 
This competition is for true heroes. They spend a lot of time preparing for it, thinking of eternal glory. 
Sacred Nucleobooms are piled up in front of the competitor, and he must break them using only parts of his own body. Some lack of accuracy is compensated by extreme bravery. 
Everybody still remembers the feat of one hero who managed to complete the competition using his head, having lost all his limbs!

[B-Sport 02]
The Diggers competition demonstrates Beeboorat endurance and their ability to deliver an abrupt and smashing strike at the enemy. Here are the rules: 
Having tanked themselves up on Nucleoboom juice (to increase muscle activity), two teams of courageous souls lie in a trench in several layers, all trying to be the one on the bottom. 
Then they are buried under stones and clay, accompanied by sports anthems. After a certain period of time that is needed to allow the clay to contract, the competition starts. 
The team with the most members to break through the surface within a set period of time wins.

[B-Sport 03]
The Zeppelins competition concludes the Olympics, and all remaining heroes take part in it. Here are the rules: 
Cheerful heroes eat enormous amounts of the finest Nucleoboom shells, which causes increased gas in their bellies. 
Having plumped up to three times their normal size, the competitors jump down from the tower onto sharp objects, trying to produce the loudest pop. 
One hero once made such a loud pop that it caused two rock slides near the stadium.

[B-Sport 04]
The Shrubs on a Bed competition demonstrates the destiny of our enemies. Here are the rules: 
While buried in the ground up to his neck, the hero must cheer on the participants who throw Nucleoboom at him. 
The competitors are given three attempts with three Nucleobooms per attempt, with the goal of scoring the best hits. 
The best snipers replace those who for some reason leave the action.

[B-Sport 05]
The Larvae competition demonstrates the Beeboorat resolve to own all the Larvae in the world. Here are the rules: 
After a short warm-up the heroes rub themselves with the juice of ripe Nucleoboom, which softens their skin. Then they play a Larva in its eternal movement. 
Other participants tie their limbs and start dragging them across a very harsh surface. The winning team is the one that gets rid of their Larva first.

[B-Sport 06]
The Bombs competition demonstrates the unstoppable vengeance of Beeboorats upon their enemies for their crimes. Here are the rules:
This competition is for the most accurate heroes. They jump blindfolded from the tower down onto strong Nucleoboom densely scattered on the ground by strict referees. 
The winner is the one who smashes the most Nucleobooms, with an unlimited number of attempts. Those who make fewer than three attempts are kicked out and converted into shrubs.

[B-Sport 07]
The Greedy Eleepods competition satirizes the depraved and degenerate bios of the Eleepods, revealing all the dirt and filth of their vicious society. Here are the rules:
The brave heroes plunge pointed metallic rods into themselves, with the bravest ones ready to lose some of their limbs to make room for more rods. 
Then they start rolling around the arena trying to pick up the most Nucleobooms, which are scattered around by the referees.

[B-Sport 08]
This one is the spectators' favorite. The Pods competition was recently invented by the stylish Geer'ah. Here are the rules: 
Each team initially consists of three heroes who set themselves on a rod well-greased with the oil of sacred Nucleoboom. This is the pod starter. 
Then the teams start tearing around the crowd picking up new members for the pods by impaling them with their rods. 
Those impaled on a rod must actively help the pod.

[B-Sport 09]
The Squeeze competition symbolizes the Beeboorats' tight cohesion under the wise guidance of the Buro. Here are the rules:
The heroes, after a good warm-up, rub themselves with Nucleoboom juice to soften their bodies, after which they start squeezing into a narrow cave. 
The winner is the team whose members manage to pack themselves in faster and better. Those who show the best results are then rubbed off the walls.

[Kernowar Waiting?]
Commissar, you can stay here with the charming Geer'ah and listen to his wise advice to expand your mind. When the Nuclear War begins, you'll go for Nucleoboom. The more you collect, the better for you!
Okay, Geer'ah, I'll wait, but not for long... 
Jablees is in the air, go for Nucleoboom now! I'll prepare the brave Heroes for their exploits in the meantime.
Anything else, you rickety beast? I'll get by without your advice! 
Give me none of your lip! Go get a basket of Nucleoboom, or I'll tell the Buro about your mischief!

[Nymbos in Inventory:G]
I see nymbos and I'm very proud of our plain workers' outstanding performance.

[Phlegma in Inventory:G]
Hee! Eleepod mucus. All right, have some beebs for your pain, mucus shipper...

[Poponka in Inventory:B]
Halt! Where are you taking those Zeexen squiggles? That's subversive stuff! Scattering it around Glorx, huh? Wheeler, your cargo is being confiscated for a check and investigation in the name of the Beeboorats!

[Toxick in Inventory:B]
Alarm! Help! Diversion! Where's security!? They're poisoning me with toxick! It hurts like hell! You want to deprive the Beeboorats of the stylish Geer'ah, sworn enemy? There's no crime worse than that! The Buro sentences you to death!

[eLeech in Inventory:G]
Come to me, lip-smacking eLeech! What a joy! I'm so proud of my nursling. The Buro will make note of your services! I know, anyone can become a regular hero!

[WeeZyk in Inventory:B]
Seems you have an ugly statue. Do you think it can inspire the Heroes to greater feats? You're wrong, damn saboteur! 
Get a smaller mechos, as I believe this will get rid of your habit of picking up garbage...

[MP0 Start]
Vanger! The VAN-WAR has started on Glorx! The pluckiest ones have started getting into it up there, and they're anxious to take your life. Go up and meet them, and try to take more than you give. Beeboorats like watching rumbles and gun fights, so don't disappoint us...

[MP1 Start]
Hey you, scavenger, the vangers have started the MECHOSOMA! You must deliver the predetermined amount of shrubs and Valorins. Load the cargo quickly, but take care that your crate doesn't collapse under the weight. The time of merchants and traffickers has come on Glorx; rock us with your carrying capacity.

[MP2 Start]
Hold the wheel tight, vanger! The PASSEMBLOSS has started! Show us how you can drive fast and throw your competitors into ditches. To help the dumb vangers, the route goes through checkpoints that are seen as glowing circles on the road. Don't mix them up with whirlpools!

[MP3 Start]
HUNTAGE started!

[MP4 Start]
MUSTODONT started!

[MP0 Comment]
Okay, yellow belly, the VAN-WAR is in full swing! Get yourself a big gun, maybe you'll feel more confident then. You can still get at the jackanapes who dared take you on in his craggy buggy. Blow the scab up so that nearby bridges collapse and beebs fall legs up!

[MP1 Comment]
The MECHOSOMA is going full blast... Tired of shipping shrubs and Valorins, huh? That's all right, but isn't it a good way to save up for a new mechos? Show the others who's the best merchant on Glorx! And if a couple of oafs end up in the water, never mind. Only tough vangers can ship goods!

[MP2 Comment]
I know it isn't that easy to win the PASSEMBLOSS. The main thing here is to not go astray or skip a checkpoint in the heat of the moment. Remember, they are those glowing circles. If an oaf lingers in front of you, throw him into a ditch without hesitating. Speed is the name of the game!

[MP3 Comment]
HUNTAGE in progress...

[MP4 Comment]
MUSTODONT in progress...

[Cirt in Inventory]
Gee whiz! The flabby vanger pulled his wimpy muscles together and secured some cirt... That's good. I'm glad you are taking the way of a loyal servant of the Buro. The Heroes perform their feats in the stadium and Nucleoboom falls from the sky for a good cause.
Praise the stylish Geer'ah, who beat some useful and practical thoughts into your dull head. Now fly to VigBoo and hand the cirt to Boorawchick. He'll weigh it and evaluate it properly.

[BadCirt in Inventory:B]
It's not usually so hard to bear my honorable duty. This is worse than when I smell toxick... Need to take some choice cirt... But where can I get it?

[GoodCirt in Inventory:G]
Oh la la, what clearness in my head! I was inspired! I remembered the multiplication table! What joy! Now I can devise a few new competitions for the Heroes! Want to take part? Just a joke, midget. Your cherished Geer'ah feels really good today.

[Larva in Inventory]
Oh, my sensitive nature is on the edge of collapse! Something interesting is sitting in this conlarver! And what can sit in a conlarver? A Larva can sit in a conlarver! You understand what you've brought, you peeperette tail? I think I'm going to weep... 
At last, another vanger who listened to the wise mentoring of stylish Geer'ah and brought glory on his Rubbox forever. If you only knew how many vangers must be converted into shrubs before you come across a gifted one... 
All right. I hope you haven't forgotten the way to VigBoo after all this joy. Boorawchick will take charge of his trophy. Our trophy, to be precise. Any vanger will tell you that you can't get a Larva without the wise mentoring of Geer'ah, even if you ride a conlarver!

[Protractor in Inventory:G]
You are bloody lucky, bungler! You got the Protractor! For a long time I've been dreaming of getting it for the stadium... 
I have a lot of clever thoughts in my wide and clear mind on how to use the Protractor. Oh, by the way, do you want to use this thing yourself? Or sell it to me!!!

[Mechanic Messiah in Inventory:B]
Whoa... whoa... whoa... stop right there. You thought your Mechanical Messiah would make me happy? What a dumb, sweet creature you are... But Geer'ah has seen something even scarier, so he won't be trembling in fear of your toy... 
My barbell is heavier, how about that?! I'll smash it into your forehead and you'll forget the way here at once. Get lost, you freak!

[Function-83 in Inventory]
Let me take a look at your Function-83+... Stylish Geer'ah can't understand how this tin can with all its holes can get through Passages... Maybe it's just a jar for phlegma? I'll give you ten beebs for it, think about it... Or even thirteen. It's a good bargain!

[Spummy in Inventory:B]
What's wrong with my glorious heroes?! They are frozen, looking at the ceiling... What about the competitions, the feats? It's sabotage! I know where the evil is from: the Chomper! Right, and my tame beebs have panicked... 
Hey you, damned wheeler, I fear nothing! I have the Medal of Fearlessness and Inflexibility. I personally destroy the toxick that we confiscate! I'll tie you up in knots with this Chomper! You stopped our Competition of Valorins, what else are you going to ruin? Get out while you still can!

[Boot Sector in Inventory]
You dug up Boot Sector? You wasted your time. Today's vangers will filch your spare mechos piece by piece before you set up this rusty old thing... Better give it to me to use in our competitions...

[Peelot in Inventory]
If the Buro could produce Flymatics in bulk, the Slaves would become unnecessary. The mechos would ship Valorins and shrubs continuously and without much trouble. Unfortunately, as there's only one Flymatic, it's an absolutely useless widget. Better sell it to me. I'll give you some beebs for it!

[Fake Kernoboo found]
Wait, what's wrong with these Nucleobooms? They're a strange color and their weight is different... I got it! They're counterfeit! You dusty sack, you wanted to cheat Geer'ah? You're wasting your time. I can notice even the slightest deviation from the rules here in the stadium. 
I can see right through you, you pilferers. Geer'ah will never allow fake Nucleoboom in the stadiums. The heroes need only the best for their farewell performance! 
You kerno-forger, dump your plunder there, near the bench. I'll check to see if there's anything else illegal there!

[Boorawchick in Inventory]
Hi Boorawchick, my colleague! Stylish Geer'ah is on duty. Watch my heroes, see how they act as one: when they start digging, nothing can be seen through the flying dirt! 
Your Valorins are very good; I have no complaints. But the cirt's been arriving mixed with clay lately. Stealing little by little? Just a joke... Report to the Buro that Geer'ah himself praised you!

[Last Moggy part note]
It's been a while since I've seen as pushy a vanger as you. You can help us! I'm planning to relocate to VigBoo soon... But that's a secret! I need a really tough mechos for the trip, for proper protection... 
So listen up: Box is a part of Last Moggy. Go ahead, put the machine together and hold your tongue. When I whistle, you come here to die for me! If they torture you, you say nothing...

[Wormaster part note]
You make me laugh, vanger. A soldier like you should be the greatest hero in the stadium. But the mechos are your business, wheelers. So, let's talk mechos. 
The Cogged Widget is a part of Wormaster, our secret weapon against the Eleepods, so keep an eye on it!

[Weexow visit]
So, good-for-nothing, did your crate get rusty after Weexow? You'd better watch it: should your wagon fall apart somewhere on Necross, the local wild beebs will gnaw you away to nothing, poor thing...

[Boozeena visit]
Tell me, is there any vegetation on Boozeena that would be good for our competitions? It would be good to surprise our heroes with something special... The Buro is sending you there on a business trip to collect the flora...

[Ark-a-Znoy visit]
What, you dodger, you've been to Ark-a-Noi? Get a couple of those local light-worms for me the next time you're there, will you? I'm thinking of a new sport for our heroes. They're kinda big, you say? That's a pity... I'll try to think of something else...

[Khox visit]
It's been a long time since I last saw survivors from Khox. You are the first in many cycles who has gotten through. The last one who returned from there complained about the darkness... I advised the dolt to take a torch with him, and that was the last I saw of him...

[hMok visit]
So what's going on over there on hMok? They say the local beebs are made of stainless steel and eat mechos... Did you notice who delivers jars with acid there? They must be pretty wicked and criminal subjects like the Zeexen...

[Threall visit]
You brought something from Threall, you nut? Enemy instructions for sabotaging our competitions, I guess? The Buro's been thinking of plugging that Passage to Threall for ages, but can't find the time...

[Eleepod in Inventory]
Oh, Geer'ah sees an Eleepod! I guess I'll place him among the heroes as a team captain. No, that's too much honor for the worm. He'd be better as equipment... 
You'll like our competitions, worm. Imagine how a big fat sack full of Fostral waters like you would pop from a Nucleoboom hit, accompanied by a storm of applause... 
That would be a show! The spectators would praise the initiative of stylish Geer'ah, the Show Creator!

[Beeboorat in Inventory]
Hey, Beeboorat! Salute stylish Geer'ah! Why are you here? Hero registration is closed and the teams have been formed. We have vacancies for a Nucleoboom squeezer and an arena cleaner. Or are you on a secret mission? Then come this way...

[Zeex in Inventory]
Aha, an acid Zeex is here! To personally see the legendary valor and rigidity of the Beeboorats with your popped eyes, I guess? Good for you! 
Looks like you hornets from Necross have finally started to recognize the superiority of the Buro and are even trying to get under our command. Keep it up, you're on the right path!

[Zyklope warning]
Wheeler! You've entertained stylish Geer'ah well and I would like to pay you back in kind. I'll tell you what the Zeexen do to you ramblers. Mad Zeephra, who lives in ZeePa, envelops all the vangers that she catches in clay and sends them to B-Zone as souvenirs. 
Funny, huh? So don't go to ZeePa, go to B-Zone instead. The local Zeexen are not that crazy...

[Boozeena Code]
Hey, vanger! You are a SUPERAGENT, aren't you? Your passenger asked me to give you a message: $(Boozeena Secret Code)... That's without doubt a cipher from the Buro. But don't be afraid, I'll hold my tongue...

[Larvae Vision note:G]
Hey, wheeler! Your Dominance has reached 50% of the level of a Buro Superagent. Well done! You are being granted access to information about Larva movement. Keep an eye on the map!


-Lampasso- Q&A

[mechos]
A vehicle built to deliver brave heroes to the stadium to perform exploits. You are but a dubious addition to it. The Buro gives out mechos, and every Slave must take care of his mechos!
Fill up your mechos with Nucleobooms to the full, Commissar, or you'll lose it quickly.
Agent! Your mechos must extend the immense glory of the Beeboorats to the sapless worlds.

[Fostral]
Slave, you will not be able to hide from the Buro on Fostral! Don't even think about it! Even your curiosity could be considered a crime!
Commissar, boost your efforts and serve harder, and then you'll see Fostral, where the enemies of the Beeboorats live.
The oldest of the sapless worlds. The fat Eleepods inhabit Fostral, and objects of interest to the Buro can be acquired there.

[Eleepods]
The Eleepods would never save a lazy Slave. The Buro liquidates every pro-Eleepod idea he comes across! Be modest, Slave.
Futile blabberers who live in holes and are known for their subversive propaganda. I love eating Eleepods!
Eleepods are fat soft worms from Fostral. They extract slime from nymbos. And they're very tasty! An Agent's mission is to capture and deliver an Eleepod here. Be alert, though: they can talk an inexperienced Agent to death!

[Leepky]
I have to tell you what a Valorin is, you empty-headed wheeler. That's the only thing you really need in that noggin of yours!
Leepky is a meat that is much too strong for you. He's the most important Eleepod... and the tastiest!
You are a nimble Agent, and Leepky is a shrewd Eleepod. Many Agents have wanted to bring him to me. You're too weak for the job.

[Podish]
Tired of serving the Beeboorats? Wish you could go back to Podish? Well, ride out of here and praise the stylish Geer'ah for his kindness!
Right, Commissar. Have you collected all the Nucleobooms on Glorx yet? No one in Podish will be happy to see you rolling them in, that's for sure...
The main escave of the Eleepods. Go through the Passage, then down along Fostral. Leepky is seated there, and some day the Beeboorats will get in. Your mission is to hasten that day!

[escave]
Boond! Your continuing visit befouls the escave of Lampasso.
The underwater lodgings of the Beeboorats, where they keep their heroes' stadiums.
All the bios of the Chain live there, and hostile escaves always hold lots of goodies. Find them and bring them here!

[pod]
This Slave has picked up some Eleepod swear words? Only the zealous delivery of heroes will save you from the Buro's anger now!
Top secret!
Unfortunately, Agent, the Buro doesn't know what this is. We presume it's one of the Eleepods' evil plots. Find out more about it!

[bunch]
A bunch is a group of Beeboorats. Beware of bunches, Slave!
The stylish Geer'ah is the master of the Lampasso bunch, and the Beeboorats revere him.
Bunches inhabit escaves, and you are one of my bunch's valued servants. Deliver some cirt to Geer'ah.

[The Chain]
The Chain is boundless, but you will spend the rest of your days here. Keep working for the Beeboorats and forget about the Chain.
A number of worlds linked together by Passages. The prosperous Glorx lies at the heart of the Chain.
The Chain is where our Agents are active, infiltrating different worlds and praising the Beeboorats.

[Larvae]
Shut up, you stinky piece of garbage! Get to VigBoo, double-time! I need heroes!
Commissar! Fear the Buro! This is under his authority. The Larvae are the most important thing in the Chain.
The Buro never gives out that information. Only the best Agents are allowed to work with the Larva. But every bunch follows her instructions, so the Buro's current objective is to catch this Larva.

[Beeboorats]
It's us, your benefactors. Our mercy on the defective Slaves has already become a legend throughout the Chain.
To serve Beeboorats is a great honor. Fear the Beeboorats!
The Beeboorats are the main bios in the Chain, and our forces are immense. Serve the Beeboorats with all you've got and you'll become the best of the vangers in the universe!

[Glorx]
A lovely water world inhabited by cheerful creatures. Where else would the locals put up with the ravings of an ignorant Slave?
Are you lost, you stupid Commissar? Look around! You're on Glorx.
Glorx is not the best place for an Agent.

[raffa]
Morons who exist only thanks to our kindness. You're one of them, most likely.
Many of them are negligent Commissars. Don't you forget it!
Forget them. Unless you want your mind to be overloaded!

[Incubator]
A place any Beeboorat would love to visit. It's not a Slave's place to know anything about it.
A nice, cozy place belonging to the Eleepods. You can find some pretty interesting things there.
Every serious Agent just has to spend some time there. eLeeches are bred in Incubator, and so the Buro keeps close watch over the place.

[bios]
Our bios has learned the essence of your existence.
The Buro has counted three bios in the Chain: the Beeboorats, the Eleepods, and the Zeexen. All under control!
The Beeboorats are the dominant bios in the Chain, and we have the best Agents.

[cirt]
Your head is too small for that kind of knowledge. But finding the cirt we need will be really good for you.
Did you ask about cirt? That's what the Beeboorats value most! Each bios collects its own.
Cirt is a product made by Larvae. Only skillful Agents are able to get it, and the Buro rewards them!

[Feenger]
Slave! The Buro cannot train an idiot like you. Think more about the great heroes and aerate your brains as often as you can.
The master of Incubator. Reported to be in contact with Leepky...
Feenger only entrusts the eLeeches to reliable vangers. You must win his trust.

[Passage]
Hey, are you going to buzz off? No way, it won't happen! The Buro will get at you no matter where you are! Steer clear of the Passages.
The Passages have stood since ancient times. The Beeboorats use them to govern the worlds.
Only Agents can use the passages to infiltrate other worlds, and only in service to the Buro.

[Zeexen]
The stylish Geer'ah doesn't recommend Slaves to make contact with the Zeexen.
The good-for-nothing inhabitants of Necross. I bet the swamps have already swallowed them up.
Blockheads. They collect all kinds of stories and don't respect Glorx. Every Agent's mission is to make the Zeexen think the Beeboorats are the mightiest bios. We need you to sneak into their escave three times.

[eLeech]
We only put up with the Eleepods for the sake of the eLeeches. The stylish Geer'ah values them greatly.
A tender, yummy feast. It's hard to get, though.
Those sly Eleepods fuss over it like mad. An eLeech delivery is something the Buro values highly.

[nymbos]
You'd better bring some heroes if you want to make Geer'ah happy.
A product of Podish. Makes a good dressing for eLeech.
For an Agent, delivering a nymbos is just degrading!

[Eleection]
Learn the Buro's Manuals. Eleepod affairs are none of your business! Brush up on what the Progress, Heroism, and Election of the Castaways are. I'll test you later.
PeepShow and Nuclear War are where you should be. That's all you need to know.
One of the Eleepods' cycles. During this time, you can get an eLeech for the Buro.

[vangers]
A good vanger is a vanger who serves the Buro. The rest are trash.
Without the Beeboorats all vangers would have kicked the bucket. Our kind attitude can be repaid only by your hard toil.
You're weird creatures. You don't even need cirt. Even a skinny Eleepod is more valuable than all of you put together.

[phlegma]
That's what you have instead of brains.
You should bring some phlegma here from Incubator. It smells like eLeech, and heroes love to slide around on it.
Only the unstylish Zeexen like phlegma. This is awfully degrading for an Agent.

[The Softie]
The Softie are Slaves who didn't obey the Buro and died a terrible death!
Some kind of strange creatures.
Ask the Zeexen. The Buro prohibits discussion of these stories while on duty.

[The Cryspo]
The glorious Beeboorats descended from the Cryspo.
The Cryspo were ancient, gloomy Beeboorats. They didn't have a Buro, so they died out.
The Zeexen have the files about the Cryspo, and the Buro wants to get this information.

[Necross]
I hope I never hear that word coming out of a Slave's mouth ever again!
A world flooded with stinky water and even stinkier inhabitants.
The last large world in the Chain, inhabited by the Zeexen. We get our cirt from there. Go explore it.

[P-beam]
Say what? You brought a hero? What? Speak up!
Quiet, Commissar! That word is to not be said aloud! Glorx enemies are everywhere!
With the help of their P-beam, those darn Eleepods receive secret information. This greatly concerns the Buro.

[Xplo]
You're fortunate to be on Glorx, Slave!
An evil place. A Departed Bios once disappeared there.
Many fine Agents have never returned from there. There is a mysterious escave there that no one can get into, and the Buro suspects the headquarters of the Main Enemies of Glorx is located inside. Any information about this is of vital importance to the Beeboorats.

[Departed Bios]
They once incurred the Buro's anger, and now they are forgotten.
Former residents of the Chain of Worlds who have decided to keep away from the Beeboorats.
Bios which formerly ruled the worlds. Their disappearance is somehow related to the Larvae.

[Plump-up]
Don't bring the Buro's rage down upon yourself, you puny little organism. It looks like the ruBeecation hasn't drained all of these trashy words from your brains yet.
The stylish Geer'ah doesn't give a damn about that.
Something to do with the Eleepods. It's not dangerous.

[Gulp-down]
You brainless parasite! Slaves like you live very short lives on Glorx. I'd bet you your mechos that you have no idea what the Progress is...
Stop swearing like that, Commissar.
This is of no concern to the Buro.

[beebs]
Too generous a reward for a skinny Slave.
We value them highly. They include some very special specimens.
Serve the Beeboorats with all you've got and you'll always have plenty of beebs.

[Creature Soup]
This upsets the stylish Geer'ah.
The Buro has established this as nothing more than the ravings of the Zeexen.
The Buro has utilized this information.

[The Clash]
The past must not be the concern of a Slave. Valorins are what we need in the present!
A great war.
According to the information received from the Zeexen, this is somehow related to the Cryspo and the Softie.

[Spiral]
You'll never have a use for Spiral.
A mysterious device found in each mechos.
A charged Spiral lets a mechos go through a Passage.

[ruBeecation]
A lot of useless rabble hang around the Chain. You used to be like them, but the generous Buro took you on and ruBeecated you, lest you become lost again.
Any vanger without a Rubbox is subjected to ruBeecation, according to the wisdom of Glorx.
Missing the life of a Slave? We can cure that with ruBeecation.

[Rubbox]
Missing your Rubbox means you'll soon be missing your head! Every Slave must carry this token of the Buro with him, so take good care of yours!
The Buro keeps an eye on its vangers. Your Rubbox records your life and service to the Beeboorats. No Rubbox means no service record. Pretty straightforward.
An Agent without a Rubbox is a slave.

[VigBoo]
The Beeboorats' main escave, at the center of Glorx. That's where they registered you and gave you a job.
VigBoo is where you can receive praise... or punishment.
The powerful Buro is seated in VigBoo.

[Lampasso]
You're spreading a terrible smell all over Lampasso and testing my patience! Your task is to deliver Valorins here. Get that in your head!
You're in Lampasso now, you stupid Commissar. Just to remind you, your task is to bring Nucleobooms here, and fast.
Do not forget the way here.

[Ogorod]
Ogorod is at the very bottom of Glorx. Oboorez is there, waiting for shrubs. Don't forget!
The farthest of the escaves. Talented Commissars deliver peeperettes there.
The Slaveocks of Glorx. You don't need to go there anymore.

[Valorin]
The goal of your life is getting and delivering Valorins.
A hero ready for glorious exploits. You deliver sacred Nucleobooms in order to assist him.
A balsam for the stylish Geer'ah.

[shrub]
Don't even think of bringing them here! The shrubs are to be taken to Ogorod, to be together with the peeperettes.
A bad Beeboorat. The Buro has sent him to Ogorod, where he will grow. Peeperettes are meant for this kind of Beeboorat.
An Agent showing an unhealthy interest in shrubs? That's strange...

[peeperette]
Hey, is this a peeperette you've brought, you fool? How dare you pick up something lying on the roads of Glorx!
The Jablees deliver these to us. The Commissars collect dark peeperettes during the Election of the Castaways, peeperettes which the Jablees shower lavishly on the roads. The Buro has found a proper use for them in Ogorod, so don't bring them here.
Any Agent keen on peeperettes must disappear immediately.

[Nucleoboom]
Don't you dare touch the sacred Nucleobooms! Your rank isn't high enough for that. If you spot something on the road, pass by. Never touch it!
Brave heroes cannot do without the holy fruit of Jablees. Every deed of valor has this fruit behind it! The Nucleoboom harvest begins when the Heroism cycle starts. By the end of the cycle, all of the Nucleobooms will have spoiled. The Commissar's mission is to ensure that the heroes all get their Nucleobooms.
Heroes like Nucleobooms, which is why Geer'ah loves them.

[Jablees]
Don't lift up your empty head so high. Watch the road! Then no silly thoughts will trouble you.
I guess you've seen some of those flying objects already. They're Jablees. It's a Commissar's job to follow them since they leave behind holy Nucleobooms and dark peeperettes.
Some sort of seaweed. If you don't give a damn about the Buro's missions anymore, you'd better ask Oboorez about this.

[Progress]
You've got the right sort of curiosity. Progress is the best time for loading heroes into the mechos!
A time for intensive Buro sessions.
The Buro holds a meeting.

[Heroism]
Be careful during this cycle. Don't squash a holy Nucleoboom by accident, and never hamper Nuclear War, you blockhead.
Time for Nuclear War! Massive air-raids by the Jablees. Nucleobooms on the roads. Racing rival Commissars. Geer'ah judges them fairly and justly.
Just seaweed. Don't try to get involved in Commissar affairs, Agent.

[Election of the Castaways]
This is when the dark peeperettes come. But the roads of Glorx aren't for you. Don't pick up anything or hinder the Commissars during the PeepShow.
The time for the dark PeepShow. Follow the Jablees and harvest peeperettes. Then Oboorez will collect the harvest.
It'd be better if you weren't on Glorx during this time.

[castaway]
Sent to Ogorod for their crimes against the Buro. To you, they're shrubs.
That's a suspicious inquiry, coming from a Commissar.
The Eleepods and the Zeexen like them for some reason. My guess is that even a castaway Beeboorat is better than the other dwellers of the sapless worlds.

[PeepShow]
That's none of your business. Not everyone is allowed to take part in the PeepShow, and you don't have enough of a service record. Remember that when the Election of the Castaways comes.
A race for rival Commissars. When the Election of the Castaways begins, and the peeperettes start pouring down on the roads, the racing starts. Ask Oboorez. He's the one in charge of PeepShow.
The Buro will not be pleased to hear of your participation in the PeepShow.

[Nuclear War]
Geer'ah forbids the Slaves to even think about Nuclear War.
Participation in Nuclear War is the main duty of a Commissar and a big chance to make the stylish Geer'ah happy. As soon as the Heroism cycle begins, Commissars will be stuffing their cargo holds with Nucleobooms, which the Jablees scatter lavishly all over the roads of Glorx. If you collect the most, you'll become an Agent!
Your Nuclear War was over long ago, Agent. If you want, I can demote you to a Commissar again, so you can remember what it was like.

[Geer'ah]
Slave! I am Geer'ah, your supervisor. I'm also known as the stylish Geer'ah. If you've forgotten about Geer'ah, though, then I'm afraid Valorins will slip your mind, too. I'll be requesting your personal file from the Buro.
I'm Geer'ah, the one in charge of the sporting events. It's very important that you please me. I humbly help the heroes with their deeds of valor.
Geer'ah is a dutiful servant of the Buro. And no one could ever accuse him of being a bad servant.

[Boorawchick]
Boorawchick is a representative of the Buro, located in Lampasso. He sends goof-ups and fugitive Slaves into the service of the Beeboorats. It may be hard labor, but it is the result of our generosity. Without it, you would be done for.
Rack your brains, moron. It was he who made you a Commissar! Looks like he promoted you too soon.
All of the servants of the Beeboorats go through Boorawchick. One day you'll get to know Boorawchick more closely, during one of the cycles where... ugh, I'm saying too much! Get back to work and forget what I told you.

[Oboorez]
The most important creature in Ogorod. Shrubs and peeperettes are his forte, but he's not strict enough with those who fail to keep their discipline.
He's an old veteran who can tell you about PeepShow.
The old chap is slowly going gaga. If you visit him, dig around in his burrow, and should you find something suspicious, report it immediately!

[The Buro]
These things have never occurred to you wheelers before! You serve the Buro, remember. The Beeboorats are the strongest of all because they obey the Buro.
If not for the Buro, heroes would never have performed their exploits, the castaways would never have grown in Ogorod, the vangers would have no one to serve, and Glorx would have dried out long ago!
Agent, do you really still feel no respect for the Buro?

[Slave]
A legless beeb with a watery smell, ugh! If you want to justify your existence, you must serve us with zeal and obey the Manual!
Slaves often come from faulty Commissars, by the way.
What am I, hard of hearing?

[Commissar]
Commissars are those whom the Buro has taken notice of. Not every Slave can become a Commissar, but any Commissar can be demoted to a Slave.
Your position as Commissar isn't set in stone. The Buro can be strict, though he is always just. Don't lose your Rubbox.
Has your service as a Commissar slipped your memory? I can help you remember again...

[Agent]
You are too inexperienced to be an Agent. Try to earn the rank of Commissar first.
A successful participation in the PipShow and Nuclear War promotes Agents to Commissars.
An Agent's task is to defend the interests of Glorx on other worlds, discover enemy plots, and obtain valuable information and food.

[Manual]
The Buro has defined for you, blockhead, what, when and how things must be done. This great masterpiece is called the Manual.
It's only through the help of the Manual that you've attained the rank of a Commissar. Had there been no Manual you would have been tramping the world not knowing what hole you were in.
Other bios don't have Manuals, which is why some of them rot in the bogs and others dry out in holes.

[ZeePa]
ZeePa is the main den of the Zeexen. There, inexperienced Agents are easily caught and liquidated.

[B-Zone]
Oh, never mention that word! The poisoners of Glorx are there, and that's where you must go as soon as you arrive on Necross.

[Zeephra]
The vicious and loose-tongued counselor of ZeePa. Her words far outnumber her knowledge, and she's always making up treachery to harm the Beeboorats and confound the Buro's servants!

[Zeekatrix]
This cursed beast has lodged in the swampiest place on Necross. We can't get at her no matter how hard we try. Zeekatrix's misdeeds against the Buro are beyond description!

[toxick]
The most dreadful weapon of the Zeexen, manufactured in B-Zone under the careful supervision of Zeekatrix.

[popon]
A kind of ragged clay pad, on which the Zeexen write all sorts of slander about the Beeboorats.

[ProtoZeek]
The Zeexen make not only poponkas. At times they produce some foul freak called WeeZyk. A weak Beeboorat becomes mesmerized by one glance at WeeZyk and just stares at it until somebody strikes him on his head.

[Spring]
A time of great danger on Necross.

[December]
This must be a moldy Zeex.

[Saturday]
These are all wicked Zeexen words. They love to invent various offensive nicknames for the Beeboorats.

[Zeeklope]
Many of our Agents on Necross would like to learn about this, but the only thing we know is that the Zeeklopes emerge with the coming of Spring.

[Weexow]
Weexow is a deserted world whose wateriness makes it reminiscent of Glorx.

[Boozeena]
You can get to Boozeena from Necross. Boozeena is covered with some kind of symbols. They confuse our agents, who haven't learned to read.

[Threall]
Quiet, dry paws, or you'll stir up trouble...

[hMok]
Something horrifying is hidden on hMok.

[Khox]
The ruins of some kind of strange structures are preserved there. We suspect it's one of the worlds that belonged to the Softie.

[Ark-a-Noi]
The Buro has banned any actions on Ark-a-Noi, due to the great number of Agents who have died there.

[Protractor]
I know it's a funny item, but I can't tell you who left it. The rumors say it can do all kinds of magic tricks. I need it in the stadium so that the Heroes can test it properly...

[Mechanical Messiah]
Shut up! Don't even think of bringing that Dread of the Vangers in here. I bet it would kill you as soon as you put it in your hold!

[Function-83+]
Somehow I just don't believe it really exists. If it were real, all the Slaves would have run away from us by now. Having a personal Passage in your hold would be unbelievable!

[Chomper]
What's that I hear, wheeler?! What, are you starting to wish you could sit around growing in the ground of Ogorod? Forget about the Chomper. Permanently.

[Boot Sector]
An anti-Beeboorat appliance which lets a vanger own several mechos at a time, wreaking havoc with the Beeboorats' record keeping!

[Flymatic]
A toy for lazy vangers.

[The Spectators]
You're telling me Zeexen fables. That's pretty risky!

[The Infernals]
If you ever find yourself on Threall, remember the legends about the Infernals before they melt you down...

[Spobs]
Spobs is an escave on Xplo. It's hostile and very suspicious. Population unknown.

[Parapheen]
Did you get your brains wet on Necross? Go dry them on Xplo.

[Carmane]
You'll remember this word more than once when you find yourself scurrying to get away from Threall!


-Ogorod-

[quotha]
Oboorez is here. What do you want, algoid?

[Empty Question]
What are you mumblin' there, want somethin'?

[Empty Molecule]
No time for blabbing. You're dismissed, doughy meatloaf!

[Block Molecule:B]
Where are you always hurrying to? Hear me out, maybe I'll make you happy...

[Out Molecule:B]
Get out of here!

[Dead Molecule]
Dead Escave

[Order to Go ViGBoo:B]
Hey, you're a stray dog! Fly to VigBoo to Boorawchick for registration, greenhorn!
You're not allowed to come here unregistered! Next time I'll call a patrol, they'll give you what for. Now go!

[Transition to ViGBoo:B]
It's you again, muddy mucus??? Where's your Rubbox? Stinker! You didn't listen to what old Oboorez told you. Well, we'll act according to the Manual.
We'll gently put you in a pot and send you straight to comrade Boorawchick with the next dispatch. That's why he sits there: to file away midges like you!

[Pipiska Win (Boond):B]
How brave you are, wheeler! Came in first in the PeepShow, huh? What side are you looking at your Rubbox from, midge? Your rank is Slave and you're a slave of the Beeboorats' Buro!
The Manual forbids Slaves to ship peeperettes, got it? Now show me again how fast you can drive before I get really upset!

[Pipiska Participation (Boond):B]
Hey, fitter, have you completely lost your marbles? Get a grip and study the Manual - that's the slave's precept! Whoever heard of Slaves riding around the world with peeperettes?
Who will bring the brave Heroes to the stadium? Boorawchick? What if I put YOU instead of a shrub in a pot for that bit of mischief? I imagine no peeperette will sprout in this mucus!
Get out of here and don't show your face again!

[Pipiska Win (Commissar):G]
What a brave guy! The PeepShow was hot this time, but you came in first. My strict lessons weren't a waste of time. As the proverb says, a slave's pain is the Beeboorats' gain.
Cipher went to VigBoo already, so prepare your Rubbox for a new record, pattern worker...

[Pipiska Participation (Commissar):G]
Oh, you brought some peeperettes to Oboorez, soldier? I'll find a use for them here. I don't waste anything!
Off you go, don't blow bubbles. Pick more, go further, and maybe that way something will come of you. Bring me more peeperettes, in other words!

[Pipiska Win (Agent)]
A win in the PeepShow isn't a great honor for an Agent. Besides, you're stopping other slaves from climbing up the ladder. Now go, soldier, use your savvy!

[Pipiska Participation (Agent)]
I'm always glad to get peeperettes, but you aren't some wretched Commissar, are you? Is that why the Buro raised you and taught you about life?
Or is my vision letting me down? When did you clean your Rubbox last? Maybe you're a Commissar? I'm old, my eyes don't work that well anymore...

[Boond Arrival]
A midge has arrived. Oboorez does a good job keeping an eye on you, midge!

[Commissar Arrival]
Commissar, do you see Oboorez, your mentor? Salute!

[Agent Arrival]
Hey, an Agent's honoring me! You came to visit old Oboorez, huh?

[Shrub in Inventory (Boond):G]
Unload the shrubs and get back there quickly, Slave. A good slave is a nimble slave!

[Heroin in Inventory (Boond):B]
Hey you, algoid smell, what's that in your bay? That's a Valorin, you abject slave! The brave Hero is ready for feats, and you bring him to Ogorod!
Get out of here while you're still alive! The stylish Geer'ah is waiting for you on the other end of Glorx. Don't linger, or else...

[+Heroin in Inventory (Boond):B]
You five-legged clot! You don't show respect for the race of Beeboorats that raised you, abject freak. It's time for you to find out where the Heroes go and what they do there. 
Maybe you'll help some brave guy accomplish some feat. Guess you could never have dreamed of that, hehe... The next vanger's going to give you a ride to Lampasso! 
Wake up! I guess your fate hasn't yet come. No vanger is willing to take you to Lampasso, since they say you're all wet and dirty. Guess they're right... And while I was watering the shrubs some raffas filched your mechos and stuff. Well, keep your chin up: at least you're still alive. Now you'll remember the Manual better!

[Kernoboo in Inventory (Boond):B]
Where did you come from, swamp mucus!? What the hell made an abject slave like you come here with fresh Nucleoboom? I'll forgive you the first time, but if you do that again, I will impose the penalty prescribed by law!

[+Kernoboo in Inventory (Boond):B]
How dare you, swamp pulp, steal Nucleoboom from Heroes! You're not even allowed to touch it. We have more worthy vangers for that!
I sort of knew my forgiveness wouldn't do any good... The lesson must be brief and clear. Get yourself out of that warm place and find somewhere else!

[Shrub in Inventory (Commissar):G]
Turning a beeb on shrubs, Commissar? Well, the Manual doesn't forbid that, but peeperettes are more important for you!

[Heroin in Inventory (Commissar)]
A Commissar lost his wits, ever heard of something like that? It's about you! Where the hell did you get the Valorin? I ought to send a signal to the Buro - they'd take care of you, you cracked Commissar...

[+Heroin in Inventory (Commissar):B]
Yeah, seems like a Commissar's job is a real struggle. The kind of job that make you go crazy. But the wise Buro always knows what to do, and that's where the Beeboorats' power lies! 
As we say, better a Slave of use than a Commissar obtuse. According to the Manual, you are demoted to Slave!

[Kernoboo in Inventory (Commissar):B]
You're lost, Commissar! You brought Nucleoboom? To me, Oboorez? Well... What shall I do with you, you dazed freak? Get out and try to get to Lampasso in time. If you're late, you're finished...

[+Kernoboo in Inventory (Commissar):B]
Again with the Nucleoboom!? Boasting about it, huh? Your stupidity isn't something to boast of. It's called sabotage! 
Guess you've got extra space in your crate, so you pick up everything you see like some crazy Eleepod. Try another mechos, maybe it will cure your bad habits!

[Shrub in Inventory (Agent)]
An Agent with a shrub. Hum... Guess a raffa robbed you. Vangers are feeble nowadays, not like in the good old days. Well, thanks for the shrubs, but... you're kind of wimpy for a soldier, huh?

[Heroin in Inventory (Agent):B]
Cursed saboteur! What if I convert you into a shrub for mocking me, old Oboorez? You'll remember at once where to ship Valorin! Even the stylish Geer'ah respects me, while you, worm, dare to play tricks. Damn pod...

[+Heroin in Inventory (Agent):B]
Still making fun of me, Agent? Well, I can crack a joke too. Oboorez isn't just here to eat cirt. According to the Buro's instructions, all your beebs are given as a charitable donation toward a new greenhouse for shrubs! 
My congratulations, generous patron!

[Kernoboo in Inventory (Agent):B]
Seems like Boorawchick gets his cirt for nothing... Ought to report this to the Buro. His Agents went on the loose, who ever heard of something like that!? They bring the holy Nucleoboom to the boondocks and don't even give a damn! Never thought I'd see this day!
Hey soldier, you've glutted yourself on that Nucleoboom, huh? I CAN'T HEAR YOU! Get lost, stinking filth...

[+Kernoboo in Inventory (Agent):B]
I've been here a long time, but I've never seen a sad sack like you. The Manual is like Zeexen's doodles for you and your Rubbox is a widget for scratching! 
But the Beeboorats' power is in our ability to settle every scoundrel's hash. By the Buro's decree we are depriving you of the sonorous title of Agent! As a Commissar you'll have a lot of time to study the Manual!

[Pipiska Waiting?]
So, eager Commissar, peeperette season is coming up. You can lie here in the meantime and wait for operation PeepShow. Agreed, fitter?
All right, Dad. I need those peeperettes to get out of your clutches. It's time for you to go. The more you pick, the better for Oboorez and the Buro. Get up there now!
Thanks, old stub. Get to your pots and I'll find myself something better to do! 
All right, sucker. Go and grub around on Glorx. Maybe you'll change your mind - we're short on peeperettes, you know. Hurry up!

[Nymbos in Inventory:G]
Smells like... Nymbos? Hey, the soldier's an artful dodger... You went the right way, wheeler. Struggle on!

[Phlegma in Inventory:G]
Hmm, decided to ship mucus? Aren't the Heroes a better load? All right, we'll find a use for this stuff... 

[Poponka in Inventory:B]
What's that!? The soldier has become a garbage collector? Shame on you, you're in the Beeboorats' service. According to the instructions, your beebs are confiscated in favor of Glorx Sanitation Service. And throw away those popons, conduct like that is unbecoming for a soldier of the Beeboorats!

[Toxick in Inventory:B]
What's irritating my eyes? Toxick in Ogorod! Alarm! You ragged bladder! Decided to poison me? You won't get away with it, you rotten mucus! Zeexen poisoner!

[eLeech in Inventory:G]
Wow, you brought an eLeech! The Buro's lessons weren't in vain. What a brave guy! Yeah, this is a real joy for old Oboorez. The Buro needs soldiers like you! I'm sending an urgent cipher to headquarters. And I've got some time to grab a bite before they come...

[WeeZyk in Inventory:B]
Phew, full-eyed ugliness! When did you last look in your bay,  garbage collector? Do I look like an Eleepod? No? So why do you bring me junk!?
Unload the bay and air out the mechos, sanitation engineer!

[MP0 Start]
Vanger! The VAN-WAR has started on Glorx! The pluckiest ones have started getting into it up there, and they're anxious to take your life. Go up and meet them, and try to take more than you give. Beeboorats like watching rumbles and gun fights, so don't disappoint us...

[MP1 Start]
Hey you, scavenger, the vangers have started the MECHOSOMA! You must deliver the predetermined amount of shrubs and Valorins. Load the cargo quickly, but take care that your crate doesn't collapse under the weight. The time of merchants and traffickers has come on Glorx; rock us with your carrying capacity.

[MP2 Start]
Hold the wheel tight, vanger! The PASSEMBLOSS has started! Show us how you can drive fast and throw your competitors into ditches. To help the dumb vangers, the route goes through checkpoints that are seen as glowing circles on the road. Don't mix them up with whirlpools!

[MP3 Start]
HUNTAGE started!

[MP4 Start]
MUSTODONT started!

[MP0 Comment]
Okay, yellow belly, the VAN-WAR is in full swing! Get yourself a big gun, maybe you'll feel more confident then. You can still get at the jackanapes who dared take you on in his craggy buggy. Blow the scab up so that nearby bridges collapse and beebs fall legs up!

[MP1 Comment]
The MECHOSOMA is going full blast... Tired of shipping shrubs and Valorins, huh? That's all right, but isn't it a good way to save up for a new mechos? Show the others who's the best merchant on Glorx! And if a couple of oafs end up in the water, never mind. Only tough vangers can ship goods!

[MP2 Comment]
I know it isn't that easy to win the PASSEMBLOSS. The main thing here is to not go astray or skip a checkpoint in the heat of the moment. Remember, they are those glowing circles. If an oaf lingers in front of you, throw him into a ditch without hesitating. Speed is the name of the game!

[MP3 Comment]
HUNTAGE in progress...

[MP4 Comment]
MUSTODONT in progress...

[Cirt in Inventory]
Oh, soldier, you brought cirt! What a brave guy! At last something came of a dummy meatloaf on wheels. Now you know why the Buro put so much effort into your upbringing. Go to Boorawchick and report on the mission.

[BadCirt in Inventory:B]
Wait, soldier... My peeperettes started fading somehow, even though I recently watered them. You know, my vegetation is sensitive, it needs a good environment. But something is definitely wrong here...

[GoodCirt in Inventory:G]
Watch this! Peeperettes shot up before they should have, and the shrubs were so-so: second sort, fourth category. What joy! I gave up all hopes of getting a harvest from this bed. You brought luck to Ogorod today, soldier!

[Larva in Inventory]
Oh, my peepers aren't cheating! I see a conlarver with a Larva! It's been a long time since vangers last brought the queen of cirt here. Guess you caught some good fortune in your conlarver, soldier! Or your doom... Depends on how diligently you've been studying the Manual and the instructions of the Buro. 
Yeah, the Beeboorats pulled off a great coup and whipped those carcasses from the sapless worlds. Go to VigBoo quickly and check the Larva into the reception committee according to protocol KD-83. 
If you pull it off, put in a word for the old chap. For example: 'Oboorez helped me in all possible ways and personally guided my actions throughout the whole campaign.' Why are you blinking? Don't you remember what happened, pupa? There you go.

[Protractor in Inventory]
So, what did you bring, soldier? Looks like the Protractor... They say when you have this thing in your bay, Threall rages at you. Although the Buro prohibits these relics of superstition, it's kinda scary anyway. I definitely don't like these Xplo doodads...

[Mechanic Messiah in Inventory:B]
You scab! You decided to wipe Ogorod out? Don't mess around with the Mechanical Messiah! Many have only understood that after it was too late... You go, go, go quickly. And throw this fiendish doodad away far from Ogorod, somewhere by the Eleepods!

[Function-83 in Inventory]
That's a funny widget you've got there. I remember the Buro once sent a cipher with a list of all the items that are illegal for vangers to carry in their bays... 
Your find is listed as 'Function-83+.' I really ought to confiscate it... All right, I guess the Buro guys have forgotten about this cipher, so carry on...

[Spummy in Inventory:B]
Ouch, the Chomper!.. Don't ruin an old chap, you rude martinet! I'm about to retire, and what have I spent an entire life of service for, to see this horror at the end?! If you don't have mercy on me, have mercy on the shrubs. Look at how they're groaning and tumbling around. And look what's happening to the peeperettes! 
What ever got into you? Guess you've lost your marbles because of your heavy duty, poor thing. You'd better be leaving, don't be angry with an old chap...

[Boot Sector in Inventory]
Well, it looks like Boot Sector. Yeah, I remember, an Agent had it once. He grabbed it in a fight, but lost his Rubbox. 
Boorawchick, as expected, stripped the brave Agent on his arrival and sent Boot Sector to my farm. 
Just imagine, that sad sack had three mechos in a cache and all in good condition, but without this thing he couldn't get them back... 
So the fellow came on a raffa and started weeping and begging me to give the widget back to him. But the instructions forbid this, you know. So we made a deal: I gave him Boot Sector and he gave me two of the three mechos on the down low. That rascal cheated the old chap, but my guys caught the bamboozler later and settled his hash good.

[Peelot in Inventory]
Flymatic, Flymatic... Seems like I've heard something about it. Oh, yes! It's a vanger buried in a box that you put in your place to drive for you. They say he's kinda slow, however. Guess that's because the box is kinda narrow.

[Fake Pipetka found]
Wait, that's a sham! This old chap knows his peeperettes, fella, seeing as how he's seen so many of them. You haven't even seen that many beebs. These fake peeperettes, according to information from the Buro, are produced by the Zeexen to shake the Beeboorat economy. 
I'll strip you of all your plunder for this forgery!

[Boorawchick in Inventory]
Dress ranks, attention! Your pushy comrade Boorawchick! Ogorod farming officer and senior shrub-growing expert Oboorez reporting! 
During my watch nothing suspicious happened. The peeperettes aren't fading, the shrubs aren't rotting. I'm content with the cirt. Awaiting further orders. Boorawchick out!

[Queen Frog part note]
I see your diligence, fitter! But on a crate like yours you won't do much. I've seen a lot of mechos and I can share something with you. 
Rattle was once taken out of Queen Frog. I did that personally. There were instructions from the Buro on scrap utilization...

[Lawn Mower part note]
Your mechos reminds me of something. You are a decent vanger: you don't spite this old chap and you study the Manual. I can help you. 
Star is a part of the Lawn Mower, but what it's for, I don't know. I'm old, you know.

[Weexow visit]
Gee! The beasts of Weexow didn't eat you, brave vanger! Good for you! Only the Buro could raise Agents like you...

[Boozeena visit]
Hi soldier! Did you see a hatch with a whirling lid over there on Boozeena? It has a widget on one side and a gadget on the other. Either that or it's a crock of funster Agents. They say it's a useful doodad...

[Ark-a-Znoy visit]
They say that if someone's been to Ark-a-Noi once, he'll never venture there again. Is it really so scary? I would enforce discipline there in a trice!

[Khox visit]
You've been to Khox, soldier? The Buro once decided to get rid of a few dodgy Agents who were suspected of having relations with the Zeexen. They sent the Agents to Khox on 'patrol.' Few came back...

[hMok visit]
You've been to hell, I should say. I tremble in fear just thinking of hMok. Yes, there is something in the worlds that even the Buro can't control, no matter how many threats Boorawchick utters...

[Threall visit]
They say a weird and wicked creature dwells on Threall, and even the Buro doesn't want to deal with it. Keep your powder dry and your mechos oiled, soldier. A different game is underway...

[Eleepod in Inventory]
Hehe, a worm from Fostral paying a visit to old Oboorez. Welcome to Ogorod! Don't you tremble, this old chap won't bother you. I just want to put together a banquet and invite you to it. You'll be a table decoration...

[Beeboorat in Inventory]
Oh, a big guy visiting our boondocks. Hello, brother, what has brought you this way? You know, I receive Beeboorats in the form of shrubs, mostly. Are you here with a message? Okay, okay I'll shut up... 
What's new in the metropolis? Is Boorawchick still chairman? Has Geer'ah been demoted for his indiscretion?

[Zeex in Inventory]
Ugh, you ugly Zeex! Gadding around looking for the Softie? Well, you'll find plenty of them in Ogorod, I promise. Vangers bring dozens of these Softies here, if that interests you. Got no room to store them; Softies here, Softies there... 
Tell me, is it true that the Zeexen have poisoned each other already and have now switched over to our side? You aren't a saboteur, are you? You'd better be calm or else I'll plant peeperettes in your popped eyes in a trice!

[Zyklope warning]
Well, soldier, the time is coming for you to get to Necross. I kind of like you, so I'm going to help you. When you are there, don't peek into ZeePa, go straight to B-Zone.
They'll turn you away three times, but then they'll let you in and tell you what you need to know. After that you can visit other hornets without fear.

[Boozeena Code]
Listen, soldier. There's something inscribed on your passenger's pass, it reads $(Boozeena Secret Code)... Do you know what that means, by any chance? Maybe it's the mark of the Ultimate Top Inspector? Well, actually, it doesn't look like that...

[Larvae Vision note:G]
You're climbing the ladder, and your Dominance has risen like a watered peeperette. Now you can scoop cirt with both, since Larvae are now seen in your mechos like other vangers. Keep your eyes peeled!


-Ogorod- Q&A

[mechos]
A shabby old rattletrap in which the vangers live.
Beeboorats don't need mechos. We keep vangers for that.
What, Agent, have you lost your marbles on Necross and forgotten everything you knew?

[Fostral]
You, blockhead, stay on Glorx, bring me shrubs, and don't get distracted!
A big sapless world. The Eleepods potter about around Fostral. You won't find any peeperettes there.
You probably know more about that than I do, Agent.

[Eleepods]
Well, son, no such nasty thing has ever grown in Ogorod.
The Buro say they're tricky criminals from Fostral, and he knows best.
Once an Agent brought me an Eleepod. What a tasty worm! Get me a couple of them, would you?

[Leepky]
Ugh, it's you, crooked tail. Where did you see Leepky? Under the bridge?
Ask the Buro about Leepky if you aren't too scared. He is the worst of the Eleepods.
I mind my little business, shrubs and peeperettes, and let the Buro take care of the rest. He is the most concerned of us all.

[Podish]
Podish isn't on Glorx. I can tell you that for sure.
I've got a cipher from Boorawchick that says something about Podish.
I might be mistaken and so confuse the Agent, but I think that Podish is the Eleepods' most important escave.

[escave]
We live in escaves. The escave you are in now is called Ogorod.
Vangers cannot enter escaves, but remember where the escaves are so that you can deliver wares there.
We can only live in escaves. I remember the time when the Buro decided to explore and inhabit the surface of Glorx. Volunteers were appointed, and the vangers took them up to the surface. By the end of the cycle, they were all dead, and that was the end of the exploration.

[pod]
A pod? A 'rotten pod' is my nickname for an overcurious vanger!
Boorawchick cannot stand the pods. I think they give him heartburn.
I remember the Buro sent me a heap of instructions on how to fight against pods, which I didn't bother to look through. But since it's for you, I could dig out some information from the archives.

[bunch]
Those who are registered in the escave are called a bunch. So you don't belong to a bunch.
I am sort of the Chief of the Ogorod bunch.
Our bunch is a small one. The Agents don't visit us often.

[The Chain]
You are confined to the Chain between VigBoo and Ogorod.
This is what Glorx and a few other worlds have always been called.
There was this dodgy Agent once who said he'd visited nine worlds and seen a lot but was unable to find the end of the Chain.

[Larvae]
You don't need to know all that. It doesn't concern you vangers.
All our lives are dictated by the Larvae. We get their signals through the cirt. They crawl around so deep underground that we wouldn't ever get their messages if it weren't for the vangers.
A vanger stopped by at my place a long time ago. The Buro had sent him to catch a Larva. He had a big box with him. But I haven't seen him ever since. You'd better keep away from Larvae!

[Beeboorats]
We Beeboorats are nice guys. Take Boorawchick. He is worth the world! You pull for us and we take care of you.
Beeboorats are the most righteous bios. All the others are jealous.
Well, Agent. What a shame that you aren't a Beeboorat.

[Glorx]
You, buddy, have been on Glorx for a long time now. It is time you got used to it and started enjoying it. Here we have the cleanest water and the nicest bios.
There are a lot of worlds, but Glorx is the wettest. You won't find whirlpools like that anywhere else!
You're an Agent from Glorx, aren't you, crackpot?

[raffa]
Useless chuckleheads. You used to be like them before you went over to Boorawchick's command.
Sometimes these blockheads go on the rampage. Then the Buro starts taking measures to clean them up.
All of them are thieves and charlatans. But an Agent shouldn't be scared of them!

[Incubator]
You, greenhorn, stop blowing bubbles and get busy with the shrubs.
A hole on Fostral flooded with mucus.
That's where they get eLeeches for the gluttonous Boorawchick.

[bios]
Those from the same bios live together in the same escave. Anyone could tell that you are not from a bios.
Well, Beeboorats, for example. And those from Fostral - they might be blunder-headed, but they are bios.
I remember one dodger who was sent by the Buro to look for the Departed Bios. Never came back.

[cirt]
Cirt, you deflated dolt, is not for your crooked paws. It's delicate stuff!
We use cirt to go from Heroism to the Election of the Castaways, and then to Progress, and then back to Heroism. Eleepods call all of these different things, which is why we have different cirt.
Soil taken from the place where a Larva has crawled. The main thing is not to mistake our Larva for an Eleepod one. But an Agent would know more about that than I do.

[Feenger]
Slave! You shouldn't know anyone called Feenger. No Beeboorat would ever call himself that.
Stop asking me stupid questions.
I don't know and I don't care.

[Passage]
Don't accidentally fall in there.
These, soldier, are a type of doorway, for example from Glorx to Fostral. Or to Necross.
You've seen more of them than I have. Lately I've been told about a mysterious Passage on Fostral. The catch is, it doesn't let anyone in.

[Zeexen]
The Zeexen really stick in the Buro's throat. You'd better not mention them too often.
Artful creatures from Necross. A vanger gave one of them a ride recently. What a deadly horror! Its eyes are like mechos wheels. Looking around everywhere and buzzing all the time! I was scared for the shrubs, but everything turned out OK.
Boorawchick is scared stiff of them. They say he blocked up the entrance to his cave to keep them away.

[eLeech]
Look, rider, I've tried an eLeech once in my lifetime. I was awarded it for my achievements in shrub-growing. I'll never forget it!
An eLeech is something like an Eleepod. They are obtained on Fostral, in Incubator. Getting them is tough.
I've met lots of eLeech-hunters. Well, listen to my advice. If you want to keep your skin, steer clear of eLeeches and Eleepods.

[nymbos]
You'd better get busy with the shrubs, you damp mold.
The Eleepods produce it. It would be great if you brought me some.
A vanger told me that the Zeexen harvest nymbos.

[Eleection]
What are you mumbling about, you dried-up beeb?
When Eleepods have their Eleection, you can get an eLeech from them.
Ask Boorawchick. He'll explain.

[vangers]
The bios' trash. By the way, you are also a vanger.
Vangers serve the bunches and travel on errands around the various worlds. The Beeboorats have the most useful vangers.
I've seen many vangers, and you are all the same. The same stupid questions coming out of your rusty mechos!

[phlegma]
May your mechos slip on phlegma and fall into the whirlpool, you wheel-bound moron!
Rumor has it that mucus has flooded an escave on Fostral and the stupid Eleepods keep baling it out.
I think I'll report this rusty Agent to the Buro.

[The Softie]
I've been serving here for a long time, but this is the first time that I've heard a Slave say that word!
In the past, you would have been demoted to a Slave or even sent to Ogorod for such words!
An Agent once told me that the Buro were looking for traces of the Softie on Fostral. Maybe they're like Eleepods.

[The Cryspo]
Silence!
The Cryspo were first, then the other bios followed.
A long time ago the Buro ordered the worship of the Cryspo.

[Necross]
The world of the nasty Zeexen. A Slave can easily drown in a swamp there, without even having had enough fun with shrubs.
A swampy world. Everything there is poisonous. I can't imagine how vangers survive there!
Rumor has it that the Cryspo used to live on Necross. But you didn't hear me say that!

[P-beam]
What's a P-beam? You must have got into a whirlpool and gotten your brains scrambled. Go take another dive, and maybe this time you'll stay there forever...
Keep your voice down, you pathetic broken pot! The Buro is making every effort to resist P-beam.
That's part of the Eleepod plot against the Buro.

[Xplo]
Try memorizing the route to VigBoo first, nimble wheeler.
You can get to Xplo from Glorx. But you'd better ask the Buro not to send you there.
A vanger who escaped from Xplo was here once. He couldn't utter a word, just stutter. I could only make out a little about quicksand and a lost escave.

[Departed Bios]
I've never seen a Departed Bios in my whole life.
The Zeexen say that other bios existed in ancient times, not just Beeboorats and Eleepods.
The Buro thinks they may return soon and are preparing to rebel. But that information is classified.

[Plump-up]
What are you mumbling about?
Ask Boorawchick. He's got a pile of garbage for brains!
I haven't been informed about that.

[Gulp-down]
Can you please just stick to shrubs or something....
That's what the Eleepods call their Heroism. Though I can't see what kind of Heroism the worms could ever have.
Are you an Agent or what? Find this out and report to the Buro!

[beebs]
Beebs are how we reward the other Slaves.
The beebs obey us, and the best beebs live on Glorx.
You must have smashed lots of beebs.

[Creature Soup]
Slave, you will never become a Commissar if you act like that! You'd do better smashing beebs than picking up bad words!
That's hostile Zeexen propaganda. It's aimed at disgracing the Buro and the Beeboorats. So shut up. We don't allow that kind of talk.
I'm not sure, but that might have been the reason why the Cryspo died out.

[The Clash]
That happened a long time ago.
It seems to be related to the Cryspo.
After the Clash, the Cryspo became the new rulers.

[Spiral]
That's what keeps you away from work, you loafer.
I am not good with your mechos things. If you were to ask me about shrubs, however...
An Agent wouldn't be much of an Agent without a spiral.

[ruBeecation]
You, greenhorn. You were at Boorawchick's and overlooked your own ruBeecation! The Manual says that every stray vanger is potentially dangerous to the Buro. So, to keep things in check, we ruBeecate all of them.
ruBeecation is a punishment for a Commissar but good luck for a Slave.
I have ruBeecated lots of Agents in my lifetime, though they all begged me for mercy. But just strictly follow the Manual and everything will be okay.

[Rubbox]
Remember, rookie: now you are no mere rambling loafer. You are in the service of the Beeboorats! This is engraved on your Rubbox, and if you lose it, no one will spare you even a legless beeb.
If I take a look at your Rubbox, I can clearly see what kind of worker you are, whether you have served well, and how close your next promotion is. But without a Rubbox, you are a nonentity.
And the most important thing - don't forget to clean it often! Your Rubbox should be a model of excellence.

[VigBoo]
VigBoo is our capital escave, where I get the shrubs from. If you work well, you will be promoted to a Commissar in VigBoo.
I get instructions and new Manuals from VigBoo. Boorawchick is the boss there.
I'll tell you a secret - it's the headquarters of the Buro!

[Lampasso]
That escave is far from here. Keep going up and you'll get there eventually. The stadiums are where you have to bring the heroes.
The stylish Geer'ah sits in Lampasso. Bring some Nucleobooms over there and you'll be rewarded.
I was nearly appointed the head of Lampasso. But Geer'ah outsmarted me.

[Ogorod]
Congratulations, oaf. You've reached Ogorod at last. Remember the way here. If you don't visit this place often, you'll never get your Commissar's Rubbox.
This place is quiet and peaceful - nothing but shrubs and peeperettes.
Stop by Ogorod sometimes, there's no one to talk to, you know.

[Valorin]
You have to pick up Valorins in VigBoo and take them to Lampasso. And make sure you don't confuse anything. If you make it, you will get some beebs.
Commissar, don't waste your time on Valorins. Get rid of that Slave habit! Get busy with the Nucleobooms.
Valorins are heroes who are brought to the stadiums to perform exploits. No bios other than us could come up with such a ritual!

[shrub]
Bring shrubs here in bulk. Boorawchick has a steady supply of them in VigBoo. By delivering the shrubs, you are helping the Buro!
We call our packed castaways shrubs. They are packed in order to keep them out of any mischief. Then I can handle them. You just keep bringing peeperettes here!
Slaves and Oboorez will take care of the shrubs. Don't interfere, agent.

[peeperette]
If you come across a dark thing with a tail while you're on the road, it's a peeperette. Don't be stupid enough to grab it!
That's why the Buro introduced the Commissars: they pick up peeperettes and deliver them to Ogorod, and I introduce them to shrubs here.
Peeperettes can only sprout in shrubs.

[Nucleoboom]
Nucleobooms look a lot like peeperettes but are lighter in color. And if Geer'ah sees a Slave like you with them, you are dead!
Jablees give out peeperettes and Nucleobooms at different times. The Buro has ruled that Nucleobooms are to go to Lampasso and peeperettes to Ogorod. This is the most basic rule for a Commissar.
If you could only see what Geer'ah uses the Nucleobooms in the stadium for, you would go crazy. Geer'ah has an inventive mind, all right.

[Jablees]
Watch out, you blockhead. If a Jablee falls on you, you'll lose what little is left of your gray matter!
The Jablees fly out during Heroism and the Election of the Castaways. Whichever Commissar notices a Jablee first is the winner.
Jablees grow in Ogorod. I look after them. But that's a secret of the Buro, so don't go babbling about it.

[Progress]
You've got jobs to do during both Progress and Heroism.
Progress is the time for preparation for Heroism. Oil your mechos and polish your Rubbox!
The chatterboxes from the Buro are beginning their meeting.

[Heroism]
Don't you fool around during Heroism! Keep to the side of the road, and if you run across a Nucleoboom, don't you dare touch it!
Heroism marks the beginning of Nuclear War. Commissars snatch Nucleobooms from each other. It's hilarious!
Heroism marks the first flight of the Jablees.

[Election of the Castaways]
I'll talk to you once you are promoted to the rank of Commissar.
For a Commissar this means, of course, PeepShow. I am always anxious to get those peeperettes. I reward those who collect the most!
The Election of the Castaways marks the second flight of the Jablees.

[castaway]
Unruly Slaves can often be seen among the castaways.
I am sick and tired of them. The Buro has never sent so many castaways before. They say VigBoo is crammed with castaways - they can hardly cope with throwing them out.
The Buro says that they are a disgrace for the Beeboorats. But I just plant peeperettes in them and nothing more.

[PeepShow]
Your PeepShow is still ahead. Just bring me lots of shrubs!
I am kind of responsible for PeepShow. When the Election of Castaways comes, the Jablees start pouring peeperettes out on Glorx. The Commissars are supposed to collect them.
I receive and register them according to protocol. The one who brings the most wins the PeepShow. Remember, though, we have to be done with this before Progress begins.
Don't get in the way of the PeepShow, Agent.

[Nuclear War]
That's a job for a Commissar.
It's similar to PeepShow, but you have to pick up Nucleobooms. Ask the stylish Geer'ah. He's the expert at these things.
The Cryspo also took part in Nuclear War before. So the Buro decided to arrange the same show in memory of the Cryspo.

[Geer'ah]
You'll see him in Lampasso. The stylish Geer'ah is actually rather spiteful and has become the terror of the Slaves.
Geer'ah holds competitions where heroes perform their exploits. He can be made happy with Nucleobooms, which he even keeps with him in his hole.
If it wasn't for Geer'ah, I would be in Lampasso now. But I am okay here.

[Boorawchick]
Boorawchick registers tramps like you and sets them on the righteous course of the Beeboorats.
The beebs bug Boorawchick in his hole, so he likes to take long trips to inspect other escaves. He's been here a couple of times. By the way, you can dig in his hole!
Dumb beast. He worships only his belly.

[Oboorez]
I am Oboorez, rookie. You owe me respect!
I, Oboorez, have seen a lot, and have been commended by the Buro.
I am in charge of the shrubs and peeperettes. If not for Oboorez, the Jablees wouldn't fly.

[The Buro]
The Buro took you under its wing and gave you work, oaf. And the Buro is watching you closely, so don't let it down!
The Buro will exist as long as the Beeboorats live. It protects us from the intrigues of our ill-wishers, frustrating their plots.
Carry out the Buro's missions and it will get stronger.

[Slave]
You are a Slave - not exactly the highest rank. Obey Oboorez, and perhaps you will succeed.
You, Commissar, climb the ladder. And don't botch up your work!
Any vanger from other worlds caught by the Buro is turned into a Slave. It's the best thing for him!

[Commissar]
Good for you, rookie. Your diligent service and zeal will make you a Commissar soon!
You're a Commissar right now. To become an Agent, you have to win victories in PeepShow and Nuclear War.
You've already gone through the Commissar stage. Don't make yourself look bad in front of the Buro!

[Agent]
Agents are the most artful of the vangers. You're still a rookie.
Shrewd Commissars can get promoted to Agents. Agents visit various worlds and see a lot of things, then they report everything to the Buro.
It's the best thing a vanger can become.

[Manual]
The Manual tells dumb Slaves what to do to be useful to the Buro.
The Manual made you a Commissar! Doesn't that make you happy?
Beeboorats were the first to invent the Manual.

[ZeePa]
As VigBoo is to us, so ZeePa is to the Zeexen. The Zeexen ringleaders are all in ZeePa. Don't go there or you might get arrested.

[B-Zone]
That's a Zeexen escave. A rotten place, but you have to go there anyway, since you are the Buro's brave servant.

[Zeephra]
Zeephra? I think I know her. Stopped by once. A nasty thing indeed! She comes from the swamp - need I say anything else?

[Zeekatrix]
A vanger once told me that Zeekatrix likes leading everyone on. She told him a tale about the Beeb King, and he believed her and set off on a big search. I couldn't talk the oaf out of it.

[toxick]
You be careful with toxick, buddy. You'd better not put any in your mechos at all. Our Buro gets antsy at the mere mention of toxick!

[popon]
This nasty stuff is produced by the Zeexen in ZeePa. It's useless rubbish, kind of like clay pancakes...

[ProtoZeek]
I hear the Eleepods like this ugly thingy. That makes sense - both the Zeexen and the Eleepods are extremely stupid!

[Spring]
Don't you use words like that while I'm on duty!

[December]
I'd definitely never eat any of that...

[Saturday]
I think that's a Zeexen assembly...

[Zeeklope]
Zeeklope is a race on Necross. A vanger once came straight here from that race. He barely escaped! The vangers were ripping things off of each other. It was terrible!

[Weexow]
One shabby vanger told me that some water beasts lived there who can eat a mechos at one gulp. You'd better not go to Weexow in a feeble wagon like that!

[Boozeena]
The Passage to Boozeena is far from here. Someone there has set up some terrible statues that shoot worse then stinkhorns.

[Threall]
You're on the wrong path, buddy. Some vangers stronger than you have left their wheels in the lava. And they say you can hear strange voices on Threall.

[hMok]
You can't get to hMok easily. And you're safer away from it.

[Khox]
Khox is a long highway where you've just got to drive flat out.

[Ark-a-Noi]
I once saw an Agent who was sent to Ark-a-Noi by the Buro. He couldn't remember anything except sand and underground beasts.

[Protractor]
A vanger was once bragging about his Protractor, saying it made his mechos invulnerable. That's hard to believe. I haven't seen the bragger since then.

[Mechanical Messiah]
A vanger told me a story. He was driving past a fighting mob. They were beating a vanger and were about to finish him. Suddenly all the mechos nearby dropped their guns and all the stuff from their bays. They stood flabbergasted like idiots. Rumors say that's what the Mechanic Messiah does.

[Function-83+]
They say this thing can take you to any world.

[Chomper]
The one who carries Chomper carries his own death. It is forever cursed!

[Boot Sector]
I've never heard of it...

[Flymatic]
A vanger should drive his mechos himself, not use this gadget. Otherwise he might get lazy and drown in a whirlpool...

[The Spectators]
I think they were crazy Softie once. But the Buro won't give you any cirt for these conversations.

[The Infernals]
I'm too old for conversations like this. But the Zeexen say it was the Infernals who cooked the Creature Soup.

[Spobs]
It isn't that easy to get into this escave. Many Agents have failed and fallen there.

[Parapheen]
I think Parapheen sits on Xplo. The Buro wants to investigate, but so far they haven't succeeded.

[Carmane]
Pray that this one whose name I won't say aloud doesn't ask you for anything. Otherwise all your fears of Threall will seem like kid stuff...


ZeePa

[quotha]
Look here, head case, what I want to say is... well, I don't know why, but I don't need you any longer. You'd better get going while the going's good...

[Empty Question]
I must be hard of hearing, even though I always washed my ears! What did you say, my love?

[Empty Molecule]
Hey, sweetie, we've talked enough for now! Be on your way...

[Block Molecule:B]
Hey, racer, wait! You're an experienced vanger. I want to chat a little more with you.

[Out Molecule:B]
The sight of you just makes me sick, you defective thing. Go away and think about what fate has made you. You disgust me!

[Dead Molecule]
Don't forget us, vanger... Zeephra once lived here.

[WeeZyk Incarnation:G]
At last you're here! We've been waiting for you for too long, mighty warrior! The glory of your deeds has reached us from the crippled vagabonds who roam about the Chain of Worlds in tin cans. Your cozy mechos is something else-such a luxurious wagon!
I swear you'll find happiness with us, the beautiful Zeexen! Ah, Necross is a gloomy place to walk about, but here in ZeePa you may feel at home, for everyone loves you, me especially, your spouse Zeephra!
We'll serve it hot to those hornets from the other end of our dump. I hope you haven't visited them yet? It's at the very bottom, the stinkiest and ugliest of places in the Chain!
It's good that we are educating them, otherwise those rotten beasts would have already kicked the bucket like the so-called Departed Bios... Have you ever heard of them?
I'll tell you later, it's funny and informative at the same time! And while you're resting, I'll tell you our Plan. You must be sick and tired of those dummy bugs of Glorx, no? Well, those little pickles have bored everyone to death, but essentially they're harmless. They don't even have any wits apart from their Manual, and even that has gone to pot...
Take Geer'ah for example, it's worth the world! When I was small I traveled there once, all snuggled in the bay of an audacious driver. I tell you, he had an ugly mug!
Oh, by the way, do you want to kiss me? Don't be scared, it's a necessity! You're my husband and you must fulfill my needs! So, Geer'ah, that fat pig, has proven even more ass-headed than I expected!
They are deprived of wits I guess, instead they have the juice of Nucleobooms in their heads...
And by the by, the Nucleobooms are the slyest dodgers! Try to get them in the bay and talk to them, as they know loads of interesting things, to say nothing of the smart peeperettes. When they get together, be alert and all ears!
You've never heard of the Beeboorat Buro, have you? Oh, those are funny guys, and you should definitely be friends with them. They regularly travel Glorx in Jablees and have a lot of handy skills... Although I, myself, haven't met them, they say they bear no resemblance to ordinary stupid Beeboorats... A puzzle...
And now I should kiss you, it doesn't hurt, they say. Though wait, you smell of worms!
You've been to those swollen beasts?! What did they tell you? Beware of those slugs: they only seem to be so lazy.
Long ago these Eleepods forced our grannies to flee from Fostral! We all remember that and we'll pay those snobs back... But never tell them that, just let them think we are still buddies! The time has not come for this yet. 
For now I won't kiss you, because they could anoint your mechos with phlegma and I'd vomit on the spot! Ah, never mind, you'll wash it all off while travelling through the bogs near here. It's not that bad, you lucky stinker!
You've never witnessed how those swollen scavengers produce their phlegma, have you? It's yucky! I'll tell you when you are in the wrong and you'll forget how to sleep after that...
Right, let's talk shop now. I suppose you've figured out how powerful you are with all your skills. You are the Holy Vanger and you will help us teach those freaks from the other side of Necross! One day I'll tell you a sad story about them.
Those cunning stinkers think themselves God knows what, and some of them even seriously think they are the real Softie!
Who besides us knows who the real Softie in the Chain are? We, the citizens of ZeePa, are the Softie! And being genuine Softie, we ought to teach a lesson to the hornets: we need to meet them with ProtoZeek, the Only Man in the Chain!
It's a pity, but ProtoZeek is now wandering in distant places and cannot himself teach the citizens of B-Zone. That's why we choose you, the Holy Vanger, being the most innocent of all, to perform this urgent task.
The best time for this enterprise is spring, that's for sure. In spring clay doesn't dry out for a long time. It's different in December: you hardly have time to blink and your bay is already arid! Do you like December, by the way? I'm not a big fan of it, because you're always thirsty and such things... Saturday is much better, I must tell you.
So, we've prepared the relics of ProtoZeek and now we only need to blow a spirit into it and send it and its escort vangers to the apostates. As soon as they see the Holy One, the apostates will crawl to us bowing like mad, but we will not receive them right away!
We will start teaching them properly! We, the genuine Softie, know how to do it! Take a trainee by her long nose and give it as much pressure as it needs, then read out the popons for three cycles into her open ears. Only then will it be a success...
We determine you to be the spirit of this ProtoZeek. What else could be so honorable and pleasant for a vanger?
You're a lucky thing, and but for your abominable smell your wife would meet her obligations right on the spot! But wait, all that is still to come! Spring is coming, so now it's time for you to get inside the relic.
I'm sure the mere sight of our god and the sound of your Inner Voice will instantly return all the B-Zoners to the righteous way of living, and they will crawl to ZeePa to be taught...
Your clever mechos and belongings will not be abandoned. I, your wife Zeephra, will use them appropriately. It was only the other day that one of my former husbands drove back in a completely broken raffa. Yet he managed to bring me the smelly stinkhorns of Fostral, so he got his reward. Your time has come, Hero!

[Toxick Delivery:G]
Hey, merchant! You delivered your precious Zeexen some toxick from those B-Zone hornets. Did they fool you with stories about how it's the most delicious juice for their teachers? Don't you believe it!
Those wicked beasts have learned how to extract one of the strongest poisons from their foul bogs and, hoping that we would taste it and all drop dead on the spot, are now sending vangers with it to ZeePa.
But we direct descendants of the Softie figured out their plot in no time, so practically none of the Zeexen died when we first tried the offering from those beggars!
The most naive had a rough go of it, as some of them had been teaching their poisoners the Essence of Life. So, here is a lesson for you, vanger: believe no one in the Chain except for your wife!
Sly witches live in B-Zone, but we, being their teachers, are much wiser. We haven't even let on that we figured out their tricks with the toxick so quickly. That was rather smart of us!
It turns out that toxick is the best bait for the beebs who multiplied throughout the whole escave and ate up our cirt. So the arrival of the toxick was just in time! We fill the container with used toxick and let new envoys from the bunches dip into it.
So don't worry, wanderer, we don't think you tried to poison us; quite the contrary, you help the happy Zeexen by bringing us toxick!
But don't tell our secret to anyone, and let the frauds picture us here dying while they think that soon they will be able to occupy our warm and cozy escave. That will make it easier for us to educate them! Many of the B-Zoners seek ways to spy on us, and here's a container full of knowledge prepared specially for their visit!

[Poponka in Inventory:B]
Hey, you daft thing, you must have it all wrong! Why did you come back with our popons? Look here, buddy, we write a Story of ProtoZeek on each popon and then send them down to the hornets, and that is pretty much their education!
Once you can read on the way to while away the time, you will be able to take in all the wisdom of ProtoZeek. No one has ever dared compete with him in wittiness!
Very few legends like this have been preserved from ancient times. They are scattered all over the Chain and if you happen to find a story yet unknown to us, you will be lavishly rewarded. 
Now go up and hurry to the other end of Necross where the Zeexen, eager for knowledge, are still awaiting fresh popons! Every self-respecting Zeex possesses a full set of popons so as to get their cirt on time.

[WeeZyk in Inventory:B]
Hey, driver! What's the matter?! Did you forget what I taught you? Why, don't you remember how you traveled to the degenerates inside ProtoZeek's relic?
If the vanger who took you to B-Zone had goofed up like you and then come back, I'm sure you would have broken his wheels the next time you saw him!
The hornets can't wait to see our Plan for their education implemented! Go up quickly and head for B-Zone! Although, a lazy bones like you could hardly bring the relics to the spot!

[Zyklope Waiting]
Zeeklope is coming soon, a pompous competition for those who would contest their right to ProtoZeek. We started it long ago, as we need to have several daredevils competing at once to get relics delivered to B-Zone quickly.
Do you wish to stay here and wait for spring, the time for riding through Necross?
All right, my dear, I'll try to bring you that kind of joy... 
Superb! Spring has come and the Selection of Master is coming up...
You know what, my marvelous? Perhaps, I should try out another time, as I need to oil my mechos... 
Listen to me, babe: not all of my husbands are able to take part in Zeeklope. Your breed is familiar to me. Beware lest your mechos fall apart due to your cowardly quivering up there...

[WeeZyk Assignment:G]
You're a lucky one, racer! You're fortunate enough to take ProtoZeek to B-Zone! Remember, there are many who wish to put it in their bays. So, are you ready for this, fitter?
Of course, you temptress! Aren't I a courageous vanger?
My choice was true and you're the Master now, don't forget it! Take ProtoZeek with you and get to B-Zone quickly. And make sure you look around during your journey! In order to secure your success, my other lovers will be watching you and will never miss the chance of snatching up ProtoZeek should you linger!
I think I will take care not to let this ugly freak into my bay: they say it brings bad luck... 
You yellow-bellied coward! It will be taken by another, pluckier guy! How dare you say that rubbish, you numbskull! Misfortune is a true companion for such a dud as you! Get out of my sight!

[WeeZyk Recession]
Alas! Another vanger has been chosen by ProtoZeek. You're not as lucky as you first seemed. Yet this is not the end, as it is the one who delivers the relic to B-Zone who is the winner. 
ProtoZeek can easily change masters during the Zeeklope, and you might be that one! Run faster up there and maybe this time you will have more luck!

[Bad Cirt Delivery:B]
What the heck is this you're bringing home, you dirty rat?! You're carrying a gross cirt, you damn stinker! 
You just hang around here and there and this is the result! You'll pay for me enduring this vile smell! Now get out of here! I wonder how your wheels can carry you!

[Good Cirt Delivery:G]
What a good boy you are! You've always been the right choice for me, honey. How sweet of you! You brought the cirt that your wife loves so much! Come here, let me kiss you - I don't care if you smell like some Eleepod... And we were just saying that a vanger should come and treat us with fresh cirt! 
Let's do some simple calculations: you've brought us $(Cirt Delivery) portions of Zeexen cirt. I see you love me, honey! But do continue to please me like this!

[NO-Cirt Delivery]
Well, that's too bad! There must be some error! What the heck do you have in your container? It's some strange sludge! You brought clay instead of cirt, you idiot! All right, it might come in handy one day, anyway. Next time try to bring us our Zeexen cirt, got it?

[MP0 Start]
Hey man, wake up! Vangers have arranged a VAN-WAR on Necross and are kicking each other around like crazy! It's a cool show this time, almost like a mini Clash. But I'm sure that without a plucky guy like you it's kinda boring up there. Get out of this hole and scatter all those wretches with your awe-inspiring appearance!

[MP1 Start]
Go load toxick and popons into your crate and remember the shortcuts between the Necross escaves. The MECHOSOMA has started! Whoever delivers his wads of goods first will be the winner. You can get it anywhere, even in the bogs, and the clever Zeexen will calculate everything.

[MP2 Start]
Are you frozen in place? We're having a PASSEMBLOSS here! Rip your wheels off the clay, crank up your rattletrap, and catch up to the big race. Don't think they'll wait for you at a checkpoint. It's a glowing circle on the road, in case you've forgotten...

[MP3 Start]
HUNTAGE started!

[MP4 Start]
MUSTODONT started!

[MP0 Comment]
The VAN-WAR is in full swing while you're sitting here, yellow belly. See how clay is crumbling from the shots and yells? Come on, go up there quickly and give it to them hot. And take a bigger gun. Should they by any chance take you down, your faithful wife will seek revenge for you upon the scoundrels.

[MP1 Comment]
The MECHOSOMA is going full blast. My store is full and those traffickers keep bringing more and more. Are you tired? Cheer up, victory is near! Another lot and my escave will fall apart from all the goods...

[MP2 Comment]
How's the PASSEMBLOSS going? You're not the only one who went astray; it's as easy as shelling peas. The PASSEMBLOSS isn't for greenhorns that can only hang around near escaves and trample beebs. The glowing circles on the road are hard to notice, I agree. But you must try hard. Once you've reached one checkpoint, go to the next. Your compass will show you the way - not a big deal, huh?

[MP3 Comment]
HUNTAGE in progress...

[MP4 Comment]
MUSTODONT in progress...

[Larva 0 Note]
It's Saturday now, honey. Somewhere far away our Larva is crawling around deep underground. That place is called $(World of Larva0).

[Larva 1 Note]
It's spring now, honey. Somewhere far away our Larva is crawling around deep underground. That place is called $(World of Larva1).

[Larva 2 Note]
It's December now, honey. Somewhere far away our Larva is crawling around deep underground. That place is called $(World of Larva2).

[Bad Larva Delivery:B]
Oh, my dear fellows, watch me dying! My eyes cannot see any more, my wings cannot fly any longer! Now you've done it: you have killed your wife, you bloody butcher! 
I will no longer write popons or poison beebs! Instead of me there will be an alien and evil Larva sitting in my place, and nobody will kiss you or caress you, you self-centered egotist! She'll gum your eyes up with clay and dust you with hostile cirt, but by then it will be too late... 
Your Zeephra will be lying all cold and dead in this escave. Beebs will be crawling over my body, and I will feel nothing! Then you will drown in the bog from sadness according to the Law on Husbands. 
Get out of here, you stupid larva-catcher! No longer am I your wife! Go to your dear Eleepods and Beeboorats and don't come back!

[Good Larva Delivery:G]
Let me kiss you, my sweetheart! I am full of joy: ProtoZeek has finally turned his eyes to his prodigal daughters and sent a Larva, the mother of $(Cycle Name of Locked Larva), to my husband's conlarver. So it was not in vain that I wrote popons while sitting through the long nights! 
It wasn't all for nothing that I spread ProtoZeek's praises among those backward B-Zone settlers. The old prophecy of the Three Larvae is coming true! My beloved has the honor of becoming a Larva-hunter, which means that I am the best of all the wives in the world. Now I must send a popon urgently with greetings to B-Zone. 
The sweet smell of the Larva makes me foolish and joyful, and my head's full of puzzles and silly thoughts! Oh dear, my husband, tell me now: did you have any visions before you captured the Larva? ProtoZeek on a heap of cirt? There are some legends of that, I remember... 
There's a big celebration in ZeePa today in honor of you and your Larva. We'll name her after you!

[Nymbos in Inventory]
Poor me, my husband is the best collector in the world! A go-getter and breadwinner! But where the heck should I put this stinky nymbos? The closet is all choked up with the rubbish. Perhaps I should feed it to the Eleepod I tamed?

[Phlegma in Inventory]
How nice! We've managed to get some foreign Eleepod phlegma! Now I'll rub it into my skin and my sweet husband will love me even more! 
It makes me a little sick though, but what would I not endure for you, my audacious vanger! So, having rubbed on the phlegma, at last we'll kiss each other, and maybe it won't make us sick.

[Heroin in Inventory:G]
Oh, what a sweet and funny Beeboorattie! How did you guess that I've been dreaming of having one? I'll tie a ribbon around it and ride it around Necross. I will be careful though, of course, lest any mean beebs try to carry me off. It will be so romantic!

[Shrub in Inventory]
Psh! What a foul bee-boo-rat!.. I would never wear such awful belts! A gift like that could only be appreciated by the B-Zone duds. Go see them, why don't you?

[eLeech in Inventory:G]
I have something new in my household! You have brought me a little eLeech. Come on, come to your new mommy! Those awful worms are absolutely impossible to train. 
You'll make a real cutie, and I'll teach you how to write popons and in the end we'll beat those evil B-Zoners! I've heard something about knotted Eleepod pods. The little shrimps get pretty dumb without them. That's how we can scare our bad husbands!

[Kernoboo in Inventory]
I'll cook a treat for you, my dear, of Nucleoboom. All wives do! I even have a recipe somewhere for how to cook it... 
There: twist off a vanger's head and place a Nucleobooms in its place. Oh no, I must have mixed it up with a Beeboorat recipe. 
Right, oh, I'll sort it out later. However, I believe we have already surpassed the Softie in our love for our husbands! I've got to write to B-Zone about this immediately to boost ZeePa's reputation in the eyes of those rebels!

[Pipetka in Inventory]
Oh, poor thing! You picked up a peeperette! Don't get upset, your Zeephra'll calm you down! And, by the way, my ears are clean. In B-Zone they don't wash their ears, no matter how much you train those little beasties... I'll stick this peeperette in my ear and start talking to the Buro guys. Now leave and make sure you don't tap or spy!

[Protractor in Inventory]
So! The Protractor is now in the hands of the one I have chosen. It must be very handy for curling lashes. Should the little thing be found in B-Zone, all the local witches would become more beautiful than I am. Don't take the Protractor there, I'd better tell you a true story about it!
Once upon a time, the Softie who invented this strange thing decided to get rid of those multiplying beebs. You should know that these creatures are not as stupid as they want you to think; they even had their own escaves! 
The tool was so dreaded by the beebs that they fell dead at the sight of it. Only the slowest and the dumbest stayed still as if nothing unusual was happening. 
The Beeboorats descended from them later on, and now they have no memories of what the Protractor was used for. 
This thing actually comes from Xplo. So when you have some free time, take it back to where it came from, and it will repay you with its utmost gratitude. Why are you staring like that? Didn't you know that everyone has his own homeland? Well there's a bit of education for you!

[Mechanic Messiah in Inventory:B]
Oh boy, I'm about to die of fear! My lazy husband has decided to frighten me a little! And I am already in awe of him as a good wife should be. I'll just flutter my wings and maybe I'll feel better. By the way, I wonder whether you've even noticed that I have them, you senseless chump! I trim them as the Latest Fashion says, and I can explain why. 
After the Clash happened, the poor Softie started digging escaves to hide in. For some reason all the entries to the escaves were built so narrowly that the Softie couldn't squeeze into the holes with the gorgeous wings that they were so proud of. Then ProtoZeek came and said, 'Salvation will be gained only by those who adhere to the Fashion!'
And he almost fully snapped the wings off the fellow who was right by his side. And that was what then became the Latest Fashion of the Universe. Since those times, we escave habitants have followed this ancient rule and truly tend to our wings! Aside from us, there's Geer'ah in the Chain who is also stylish, but that's another story. 
Whew! I've had a bit of a talk and now I feel much better. As for your Messiah, throw it away and keep out of mischief, my dear. Now go! What's the use of standing still together with this freak?

[Function-83 in Inventory:G]
I've had a lot of husbands, but you have out-gunned them all! You have become the best of all the vangers! Now I see that it was not in vain that I married you. The other vangers are such butter-fingers! Whenever they carry toxick, they manage to spill over half of it. The whole of Necross is awash in it. And they don't let me kiss them... But with the help of Function-83+ we'll start our life anew!
Listen to this: in the times when the Softie lived in families and all their wives stayed in the escaves and their husband vangers roamed around the worlds, each of them had their own Function-83+. With its help they could instantly reach anywhere and from there they brought anything their wives could wish for. 
But then the silly witches thought: 'Why on earth do we need these husbands? We'll take their Functions and start wandering the worlds ourselves!' But they miscalculated, stupid things! Without the Functions the husband vangers died immediately, causing the Functions to turn into good-for-nothing doodads. 
There survived only one vanger who got himself far away and didn't rush to get trapped on his return home. Suddenly ProtoZeek turned up in front of him and cried: 'Let all the sluggish find salvation!' Then the vanger thought a little and decided not to return to the escave. Since then there's been only one Function-83+.

[Spummy in Inventory:B]
Oh my good fellows, please help me or I'll die! Just look at my great idiot! As a gift he brought his wife the Chomper! I knew this marriage would never lead to a good end! I prattled and nursed this fool and kissed him and I always washed my ears, and as gratitude what do I get? The Chomper in my face!
All vangers are alike, without exception! My predecessor warned me about this! I wouldn't wish the Chomper on even the B-Zone settlers! Because of that we have a splitting headache, our ears swell out, our noses tingle, and some of us even get writhing fits! Now listen to an instructive story I'll tell you about this. 
In the old days when the Chomper was not as wicked and disgusting as it is now, it whiled its time away lying on the side of the road and asking each passerby one and the same thing: 'One walker, two lookers, what is that?' The recipients of his question, all embarrassed, walked away. That made the Chomper laugh and gloat over their failure. 
One day our brave ProtoZeek was walking down that road and he was questioned by the Chomper as usual. ProtoZeek scanned himself from top to bottom and cried out in a flash of brilliance: 'It's me!' On hearing that, the Chomper understood that it couldn't lie and exult on the road any longer. 
So it headed, all distressed and gloomy, far away to hMok. That's where it became entirely spoiled, and since then it has developed a hatred for all the offspring of ProtoZeek and dreams of killing us all...

[Boot Sector in Inventory:G]
So now my vanger has Boot Sector! Don't you forget your Zeephra while bouncing between the mechos and escaves. I once tried to apply this widget to myself. I stuck my head inside it and tried to put it on my feet, then I applied it to my ears...
I still have not succeeded in capturing a mechos. I must have many sins, as only pure vangers are able to commune with Boot Sector, the gift of ProtoZeek. Have you ever been told this amusing story? It happened like this: one day a daring vanger caught a lot of beebs. 
He sat down all abashed and cried. He didn't know what to do with such a catch, and in the meantime the beebs were crawling all over the place in various directions. ProtoZeek was passing by and, having analyzed the situation, he gave the poor vanger this Boot Sector and said, 'Let not one of the beebs be saved!'
Since those times skillful vangers can have as many mechos as they want...

[Peelot in Inventory]
Well, baby, the Flymatic will help you find the way back to your precious Zeephra and come home from work on time! By making use of such a valuable tool you will be able to distract yourself from routine work with the mechos and drift away into pleasant dreams.
The story goes that one day a vanger took ProtoZeek to the Fair of the Beebs. The driver got all soaked in sweat from the anxiety of being responsible for such valuable cargo. A large blob of perspiration streamed down his forehead and hung under his nose right over the controls, ready to fall down and short the circuits. 
However, our hero dared not move or even take his hands off the gears lest he fall into a ditch and interrupt ProtoZeek's meditation. The latter saw the vanger's sufferings and, having uttered, 'Let those who perspire be saved!', he took the Flymatic right out of thin air and handed it to him. That's how it happened.

[Invalid poponka checking]
Alright, honey, your answers sound quite convincing, although I cannot check their veracity as my crib has gone missing. It must've been delivered to B-Zone by mistake with the popons. How could I be so absent-minded! However, judging by your cunning mug, your knowledge of the deeds of ProtoZeek is amazing! Oh yes, it simply could not be any other way: my hubbies are all famous for their rare abilities. Perhaps I'll start making a new Pereponka according to your answers.

[Boorawchick in Inventory:G]
My dear friend Boorawchick, at last you have decided to come see your Zeephra! They say the Beeboorats are silly lazy bones, but they lie! Right, you little dummy, do you remember how you insulted me when I was visiting VigBoo? Come on now, don't cry, I'm not offended... 
Now, want some fresh toxick? It's fresh from B-Zone. Come on, stop trembling, it's just a joke! 
Or maybe you'd like to see the inside of one of the most beautiful bogs of Necross? Oh come on now, stop hiding in the corner, you poor thing... Oh, what a naughty thing you are! You neither want anything nor make me smile. 
Hey vanger, you daft thing, take this slow-witted creep away; it's getting on my nerves. How could you serve this feckless blockhead? You are both the products of a rare folly.

[Sandoll part note]
Well, sweetie, Zeephra seems to like you! You are the best of my husbands and do everything I ask you to. Your Zeephra can please you now too. Though you might think I give you empty promises, I know loads of vanger secrets! What would you say to this: Zigger-Zagger is a Sandoll spare part. That's where it goes, you dolt! Your wife knows mechos much better than you do!

[Queen Frog part note]
I very much respect your efforts, vanger! And I would like your mechos to move up to the position of Zeephra's new beloved husband! Once my predecessor revealed an incredible secret to me and forced me to share it with one of my sweethearts. Heavy Iron is actually a Queen Frog part, would you believe it?

[Weexow visit]
Have you been to Weexow? How horrible, I'm drowning! Many of my former husbands drowned there out of distress. I wept and moaned so much... Here, I have a special jar for tears from that world of water! What can be done about this? It is your job to win my love by demonstrating your exploits.

[Boozeena visit]
Is it true that Boozeena grows flowers of such unknown beauty? Please bring me some, and I'll decorate myself with them. They say ProtoZeek himself grew them, and along with that he left his Word on Boozeena. Whoever knows it knows the essence of Boozeena!

[Ark-a-Znoy visit]
You scamp! Are you here from Ark-a-Noi? I hope you didn't squash the little local beasts with your wheels there. They are such shy and bashful fidgets, aren't they? If you did, I'll be offended, you horrid creature! Those little pets are so fond of playing tag.

[Khox visit]
Tell me, was it scary there on Khox? Oh, I'm such a yellow-belly! They say that world was built by the Softie, but then something went wrong there, the world began to fade, and they all fled. It's so unfortunate: they say the world turned bad and smelly. On the way back from their screw up, the Softie were devoured by Beeboorats. Isn't that romantic?!

[hMok visit]
Don't tell me about hMok, you trotter. I beg you not to go there anymore. There's no Passage to that place, I guess you've noticed, which is not by chance! That world was separated from the Chain by ProtoZeek, lest our wives stand on the roads and wait in vain for their vangers.

[Threall visit]
You poor thing! All my former hubbies went crazy after going to Threall. Amazingly, you seem fine!
Hey, let me look at you, you nut! Aha! I see your rear wheel is wobbling! The time has come for us to get a divorce, my dear, before unlucky things start happening. Go back now and drown your sorrows!

[Eleepod in Inventory]
Ew, you ugly Eleepod! Why did you return, I wonder? To lecture and bore me? I won't let you! I know what to do with you! You will knead the clay for baking popons. That will be perfect for a hulk like you! 
Perhaps I'll feed you and then flatten you, since you'd make a perfect mat. Only I can't forget to shut you up, right? My friend once did the same, but then the beebs nibbled through...

[Beeboorat in Inventory]
Look, there's a little beeboorattie! Oh, he's so angry! I know, it's your silly Buro's Manual that has made you so confused. You are such a tootsie! Now now, I'm only mocking you. Those wicked villains from B-Zone will see that even Beeboorats come to see Zeephra, seeing as how she's so nice and kind...

[Zeex in Inventory]
Well, finally! The pilgrim from B-Zone has arrived! Now would you like to touch a genuine ProtoZeek claw? Or would you like to see a new kind of popon? All right! Now tell me, has poor Zeekatrix become completely crippled and lost all her husbands because of toxick? Well, you may stay with us for good, you B-Zone creature. Zeephra will spare nothing for a newcomer: she'll teach you how to wash your ears and how to read the popons aloud...
Well, you may stay with us for good, you B-Zone creature. Zeephra will spare nothing for a newcomer: she'll teach you how to wash your ears and how to read the popons aloud...

[Key to Khox Gift:G]
Well, my husband has matured! It's time for him to go and see the cursed worlds. I feel so bad that you have to leave, my love! Each of my former hubbies somehow managed to end up there, I don't know why. I hope you'll be more adroit and clever. Boozeena is not the worst of worlds, and you wouldn't be the first to survive!

[Key to Ark-a-Znoy Gift:G]
Well, well, I see you want to go to Ark-a-Noi? Your Zeephra can't keep you here anymore. You're all alike and want to get as far away from your families as you can! Alright, go now and let them gobble you up there! I'll find another husband for myself and he will be much better than you, and I'll even finally be able to kiss him!
Oh, I didn't tell you how much tasty and useful cirt you must bring me to get the key to dreadful Boozeena! I won't tell you; that'll save your health!
Oh yes, and don't you forget to charge your Spiral so the local beasts don't make you their lunch!

[Larvae Vision note:G]
Oh, my sweetheart! You are halfway to becoming the chosen one of Zeephra and ProtoZeek. I am so glad for you! ProtoZeek is blessing your mechos and showing a Larva on your map. This is a great honor for you and a joy for me!


-ZeePa- Q&A

[mechos]
So, you've finally noticed the can you are sitting in? You should have noticed it earlier. Mechos are the miserable tatters of the Softie's former might. The vangers do still use them, but when the real Softie return, they'll demand all that's theirs back...
After creating the bios, ProtoZeek was disappointed that they were so fragile. So he decided to build metal servants - mechos - for them, from the Softie's ruins. But the steel was spiritless, and the mechos were inanimate. At last he decided to deal with the Infernals, and from them he received the vangers...

[Fostral]
All vangers hatch on Fostral - don't you remember? Legend says that ProtoZeek suffered for 83 cycles on Fostral, tormented by Eleepod poetry. It's a very evil place...
Well, Fostral is Fostral. It will soon fold itself inside out, since the Eleepods have pierced it with their underground passages. Beware of riding around there with a heavy load! There's even a ProtoZeek prophecy about that...

[Eleepods]
Well, if I am your wife, then the Eleepods are your parents. Everything has a family arrangement in the Chain of Worlds. There is even an overly-curious family freak - you!
We know all there is to know about the Eleepods. Hear how they emerged: Once, ProtoZeek was walking along the riverbank when he suddenly slipped on a blob of slime. This made him very angry, and he gave life to the slime so that it would crawl aside, out of his way. And that's how those stuck-up Eleepods appeared!

[Leepky]
It's me who should ask you about Leepky. You must be good friends with him. I can only say, that when he was driven, in the form of an eLeech, from Incubator, the mechos was bombarded by a raffa gang and then it was hardly prevented from drowning. These childish tribulations reflect much on his temper...
I once corresponded with Leepky, using popons. He signed his messages 'The Podish Martyr'. What a stuck-up loser! That fat mug doesn't even believe in ProtoZeek...

[Podish]
Podish is the name of the Eleepod's main hole. At the time of the Clash, a store of pods was kept there which the Softie used to poison the Cryspo. Later on, ProtoZeek sent the cowardly Eleepods to live there...
If only you knew how the Eleepods gained Podish for themselves, you would cry and sob! Merry little beebs once lived happily in that escave. But the evil Eleepods decided to drive them out of it and filled it with a sea of phlegma. Since those times the poor beebs have been homeless, roaming the worlds...

[escave]
The escaves appeared in a very unusual way. The Softie decided to find out what was on the other side of the world. They began to dig deep holes, but the holes became so deep and winding that the Softie couldn't find the way back to the surface and lived in the holes instead...
We've been living in the escaves since the Clash. WeeZyk suffered a lot from nightmares - warlike cries kept breaking his concentration. Then he dug up many shelters for himslef in all the worlds and after the Clash he granted them all to different bios to lodge in...

[pod]
Here is the true story of the pods. Have you ever noticed that the Eleepods have tails? Listen to this: sitting in their dark holes, the worms cling to one another by their tails, and after that they can't split apart. This bunch of Eleepods is called a pod. I'll tell you more about this wonder later, once you've grown up a little...
Do you want to listen to the rest of the story about the pods? Good. After the Eleepods bind themselves in pods by their tails, each of them starts twitching, trying to break off the pod. Those who succeed become the Eleepod's counselors. That's how the story goes. If you don't like it, you can just go away...

[bunch]
All the bios consist of bunches, and the bunches live in escaves. In ZeePa, for example, there is one bunch, a right one, and in B-Zone is another, a wrong one. Other worlds also have various bunches, but those are completely wrong. Each of the bunches has its own idiosyncrasies...
Long ago, the escave inhabitants used to visit each other. At that time, they had a very short memory. So the guests, having forgotten their way back, stayed with the hosts. In the end, they all got mixed and scuffled in fright. Then ProtoZeek ordered everyone to go back to their own bunches and never to arrange any parties!

[The Chain]
The Chain of Worlds was created by the Softie to be inhabited by beebs, which they loved to squash. They toiled on and on creating the Chain, until they suddenly met the Cryspo, who started devouring their beebs. The Softie set about fighting the Cryspo and forgot to finish the Chain...
Ages and ages ago, together with the Softie, ProtoZeek built the Chain of Worlds. He was the Chief Designer. Basically, it was he who invented and then created it all. The Passages are his most important invention. But then he got tired and made up his mind to start a family - that is to live with us, the Zeexen...

[Larvae]
Oh, Larvae! Any well brought-up vanger-husband must catch a Larva for his wife-counselor! All of these bios worship these Mothers of Cirt. They are our guides to the Softie, who live on the best of the worlds - Earth!
Once ProtoZeek grew weary of life, his body fell apart into multiple bits, which then turned into the Larvae. So even after his demise, he continues controlling the bios. Only the pious Zeexen remember this; the others grow dumb in their ignorance...

[Beeboorats]
Vanger! Judging by your miserable, scared look, you've been captured by vulgar types. Those overgrown beebs of encephaloid matter are constantly spoiled by Glorx's moisture. That's why they are so rude. But you can relax - the worst is past. Zeephra will save you!
Once, ProtoZeek decided to teach the beebs to write and to conduct the rituals, but their heads were so tiny that they couldn't get anything of worth into them. Then ProtoZeek thought a bit and enlarged the beebs, right on the spot. That's how the Beeboorats appeared. Before long, ProtoZeek became horrified at what he had done...

[Glorx]
Glorx would have been a good world, if all the Beeboorats had been ousted from there. WeeZyk liked to brood over the waters of Glorx and to wash his ears there. The Very First Poponka was composed on Glorx. When the Softie come back, they'll grant us Glorx for all our patience and piousness!
On this world, the Softie and the Cryspo clashed in battle. The whole of Glorx was covered in heaps of torn-off paws and burnt mechos. ProtoZeek saw this and resolved to remove it from his sight. Then a heap of water began to pour from the skies until everything was flooded. And once Glorx dries out, the Chain will end!

[raffa]
The raffas are all Zeephra's former husbands, without exception. After divorce, they go to Glorx to hang around the Beeboorats, but the latter don't give a fig about them.
ProtoZeek willed that the vangers would not upset the raffa. Once, they saved him from the Big Boo, hiding him in their cargo holds and passing him from one to another, while the monster in his fury pounced on the brave heroes.

[Incubator]
Incubator is a sacred place to the Eleepods. There they make eLeeches from nymbos. Nobody knows how they do it. I myself have never been successful at repeating the process.
I know very little about Incubator. The only thing I am aware of is that ProtoZeek once became badly frozen there and created a heat source right on the spot. Later, Incubator was built there.

[bios]
The bios are by-products of the Clash. After the Clash, no one was left alive, except for ProtoZeek, who was shepherding beebs during the battle. He felt lonely and so decided to create the Softie and the Cryspo anew... But you are too young for this knowledge. Return once your skills have improved.
The bios?.. We stopped when ProtoZeek decided to recreate the Softie and the Cryspo. He started collecting bits and bobs from the dead bodies and composed new friends from them.
A Softie's leg here, a Cryspo's head there, the eye of a beeb - he stuck them together. He toiled on and on, and that's how the bios were created. Perhaps they are not too attractive, but at least they are quite numerous.

[cirt]
Cirt is holy soil which retains a spark of ProtoZeek's spirit and nourishes our minds and hopes. Only the most reliable, decent vangers - my husbands, that is - are entrusted to collect cirt. And it is only they who can aspire to meeting an actual Larva, one of the Queens of Cirt.
As ProtoZeek was departing, he decided not to leave his offspring to fate and left his footprints everywhere, on every bit of the world. And so he did! Now cirt can be found everywhere. Also, he bequeathed his Larva to everyone, even to the bios who have now forgotten him.

[Feenger]
Feenger is the counselor of Incubator. I envy Leepky such a smart assistant who obeys him without a single complaint! My Zeekatrix is quite another thing: she's such a trouble-maker! I wouldn't be surprised if I found out she reads only every other popon and keeps them all in one big messy pile!
Feenger is not as simple as he may seem. I visited him to learn more about Incubator, the place once visited by ProtoZeek. But he neither showed nor told me anything, and I left disappointed.

[Passage]
The Passages are ProtoZeek's invention, no doubt. He was the best of the Softie and had many skills. If you don't believe me, try to find someone nowadays who can build a Passage! Oh, I could tell you so much more...
Once ProtoZeek was picking at the ground with a stick when suddenly it slipped under the ground. The beebs shepherded by ProtoZeek started squeezing into the hole, and when they came back up, they were all well-fed and happy.
ProtoZeek realized that it wasn't a mere hole, and he called the rest of the Softie. That's how the first Passage was opened.

[Zeexen]
Zeexen are the only creatures who remember and worship WeeZyk, the creator of the Chain and all the bios. He made us in his own likeness, which means we are the genuine Softie. At least, you won't find anyone who resembles them more.
In fixing the post-Clash problems, ProtoZeek utilized the bodies of the dead. He was just finishing with one of the bodies when a hurricane swept away all the remaining legs. So ProtoZeek tore off his own leg in the ecstasy of creation and joined it to the first Zeex. That's how we, the Holy Legs, appeared.

[eLeech]
An eLeech is an Eleepod embryo. They are made from nymbos in the depths of Incubator. Then vangers take the little sprats to Podish for nursing. In Podish, a real treat awaits them... Go boost your intelligence, and then I'll tell you more about it.
eLeeches are real monsters. They terrify all of Podish! When an eLeech arrives there, it starts pouncing at and hogging down the worms alive! After it's satiated, it demands they read him poetry to improve his digestion. These are the sort of ridiculous customs the uneducated bios have!

[nymbos]
The Eleepods produce nymbos by squeezing them out of themselves. That must be very exciting. After that, the nymbos is taken to Incubator, where it is processed by faulty Eleepods specially appointed to this sort of job.
I've got an idea about that. I think that the Eleepods are tightly set in their pods, rubbing constantly against one another. So their skin peels off, and the worms roll it up and send it to Incubator. Those are what end up being called nymbos.

[Eleection]
The Eleection is a mass export of eLeeches from Incubator. Once every three cycles, they fill up the escave until there is no space left. Then the vangers are summoned to help to take the treasure away to Podish. But if you leave them on that world, the eLeeches crawl back and smash everything!
Forget about Eleection, honey! Only Zeeklope has been blessed by ProtoZeek. The other races are all dross and vanity!

[vangers]
The vangers are ProtoZeek's favorites. He sent them to serve the wife-counselors for the rest of their lives, strictly observing the Softie's requirements. Wild bios have wild vangers who do nothing but plunder or loaf around aimlessly. Zeephra tries as hard as she can to get the tramps back to a righteous way of living!
When ProtoZeek created the mechos, they were still and lifeless like other ordinary iron stuff. Then he asked the Infernals for help, and they breathed life into the mechos and created vangers.
In exchange, the Infernals asked ProtoZeek to grant them power over the vangers. ProtoZeek agreed and selflessly sacrificed the vangers to the bios.

[phlegma]
Eleepods are rather fat in build, as you might have noticed. Besides, they are terribly lazy. They neglected to dig holes of the right size in their escaves and now they have to rub themselves with phlegma to squeeze through those narrow holes. But for that phlegma, these fat pigs would never make a single move.
ProtoZeek made the Eleepods out of slime, an unstable material. The Eleepods have inherited this trait from their ancestors. To keep from spilling all over the place, they pour seas of phlegma onto themselves to replace their slime skin, which vanishes naturally over time.

[The Softie]
They were an ancient, mighty tribe. But they suffered from their own generosity. In their haste to expand their domain and then to breed more lovely beebs in their vast new territories, the Softie started digging Passages... But I can see you are still too young to comprehend this truth. Come back later.
I'll tell you the rest of the story about the Softie... The Softie, after building the passages, bumped into the wicked Cryspo, who liked the beebs too, but from a diner's point of view. The honorable Softie decided to defend the beebs, but they all died together with the Cryspo in a great battle. Only ProtoZeek survived.

[The Cryspo]
Oh, that was an old and wicked tribe. Nobody knows where they came from. It's only known that there was a shortage of wits when they were under the creation. They had enormous stomachs. Those morons ruined the Softie together with themselves during the Clash...
Please don't ask me about them! Some ignorant bios think that they descended from the Cryspo! That's a terrible lie. It's very well-known that, when creating the bios, ProtoZeek only made use of the Softie's body parts! If he ever used Cryspo offal, I'm sure it was purely by mistake.

[Necross]
ProtoZeek granted Necross to the Zeexen. It's a little boggy, but it's sacred. It is the swamps of Necross which radiate the light of true knowledge onto all other worlds.
We were granted Necross since ProtoZeek created us last. That's why the Zeexen are the crown of his labors! Although the drier worlds were given to the less perfect creations, we humbly accept that.

[P-beam]
P-beam is a gathering of Eleepods, where they discuss the lastest events. Nothing interesting.
ProtoZeek forgave the Eleepods for their excessive sliminess and bestowed a special talent upon them. Since then, whenever they're gathered together, the worms are able to foresee any hazard, wherever it may come from. Once they are deprived of this gift, they'll die out. Still, they have forgotten whom to praise for their salvation.

[Xplo]
A mysterious world, the only one on which no bios have ever lived. There is an escave there, but it was not built by ProtoZeek, and the chronicles don't mention anything about it. It's a hostile place.
It's a terrible secret. Among the Softie there were WeeZyk's foes who were envious of his talent to build the Passages. They finally became heated and possessed by their envy, they moved to Xplo and built a lair for themselves. They were called Spectors-Observers. They only observed and didn't want to work.

[Departed Bios]
The Departed Bios revered ProtoZeek, and that's why their vangers were the best and their escaves were always full of cirt - the Larvae favored them. Finally, as a token of their gratitude, the Mothers of Cirt showed the righteous ones the way to the land of ProtoZeek, where he rejoined his offspring.
For us Zeexen, the Departed Bios are an example of piousness and good manners. Some day ProtoZeek will give us a sign and we will become a Departed Bios too, departed to Cirtland.

[Plump-up]
The Plump-up is an Eleepod cycle. During this they grow so incredibly fat, that they can neither move nor stir, but sit on and on immovably generating loads of nymbos. You'd better not disturb them during this time, for they are very short-tempered.
The most interesting things about this have already been said.

[Gulp-down]
Gulp-down? If you ask an Eleepod about that, it will start trembling from head to toe and huddle up in a corner! The worms are always scared to death at the thought of Gulp-down beginning, for during this time an eLeech arrives in Podish and the great slaughter begins. But such is the fate of those who deny ProtoZeek.
A terrible time comes for the Eleepods when the Gulp-down starts. The eLeech calms down only once it's stuffed itself with the worms' flesh. Then the victims return to normal and start training the eLeech to be an Eleepod.

[beebs]
The beebs used to be the Softie's favorites, sweet, brainless little beasts... This love for them brought that powerful tribe to its downfall! However, the beebs survived the Clash, along with ProtoZeek.
ProtoZeek made use of the beebs - those witless beings - to create some bios. I won't tell you which bios. That's why you should respect those little creatures. Squash them only when your wheels are clean!

[Creature Soup]
No one remained alive after the Clash - limbs and body parts were scattered around the battlefields. ProtoZeek used them as building material to form a new population. He brought stumps, heads and tails together and piled them up in one heap. But the greedy gluttonous beebs... No, I won't tell you the rest of the story.
Alright, pushy one, listen. The hungry beebs began to pilfer the body remains that ProtoZeek had collected to construct the bios. ProtoZeek dared not kill the unreasonable beings, so he hid all the bits away from them in a big pot.
It turned into a kind of soup... uh... soup was a common Softie food. Anyway, that's how all the bios happened to emerge, out of that Creature Soup.

[The Clash]
The Clash was the doom of the Softie and the Cryspo, who collided in a desperate battle in the Chain of the Worlds. The Softie were clever and strong, but the Cryspo were furious and countless. They killed one another other so inventively and with such an aggression, that no one endured except for WeeZyk.
Some say that not all the Softie and Cryspo died in the Clash. Some of them holed up in their worlds and are gathering their forces, waiting for the Very Last Clash. After that, the Chain of the Worlds will implode, all bios will perish, and there will be nothing but emptiness.

[Spiral]
When ProtoZeek was creating the mechos, he broke his wonderful stick which he used to shepherd the beebs into several parts. He inserted these parts into the mechos' secret slots and cast a spell on them... Once you have more experience, I'll tell you the most important part!
Here is the continuation of the story. After that WeeZyk collected the smartest bios and gave them the mechos. He whispered a magic word to each of the bios, which would open the Passage. Since then the key-word has passed from one counselor to another, yet only the Zeexen remember the whole truth.

[ruBeecation]
The Beeboorats neither revere ProtoZeek nor follow his behests to love and care for the vangers. You mean nothing to them, which is why you are only robbed by those web-footed brigands. Their end will not be a good one!
A loathsome procedure. Once there lived a Beeboorat counselor. The vangers were always mocking him for his foolishness, so he decided to pay them back and to drum respect for himself into their heads. So, the old swag invented ruBeecation. The vangers were helpless and had to endure it.

[Rubbox]
ProtoZeek taught that a vanger is valuable in and of itself. The Beeboorats, however, have descended into heresy, and consider a vanger a vanger only in the presence of a Rubbox - if there is a Rubbox, there is a vanger, if there is no Rubbox, there is no vanger. Keep this in mind and try not to lose that collar!
I know that at first the Rubbox was merely a mark. In days gone by, those doltish Beeboorats couldn't even count the vangers who delivered cirt to them properly and got them confused all the time.
So they begged the vangers to mark their mechos with crosses. The vangers relented to those dummies and agreed. If only they had known how that would end up!

[VigBoo]
VigBoo? I've been there once. I saw Boorawchick there. That escave is all railed up, chained up, and barricaded. I beat my wings against the barricades! I'll never ever step into that land again!
Crazy creatures live in VigBoo. They are always scurrying around in different directions, knocking one another down and carrying stones and seaweed from one place to another. They make one slag heap by clearing out an old one, then they start all over again. It's a nightmare! It's said they're preparing for war.

[Lampasso]
Lampasso serves as another example of those who go crazy by abandoning belief in ProtoZeek. There are some stadiums there where the crazy hordes maim themselves in various awful ways. I passed out when I first saw it!
Were ProtoZeek to see Lampasso now, he would deeply regret that he had created that bios. Lampasso is a blot on the Chain of Worlds!

[Ogorod]
Ogorod is the refuge for the shrubs and the crippled. This place is almost out of reach of the frantic energy of Boorawchick, and as such is the calmest site on Glorx.
I always drift into melancholy in Ogorod. There, you ask yourself, 'What is it all for?' and realize all the vanity of the universe like nowhere else in the Chain...

[Valorin]
Oh, Valorin is a peculiar object. It's nothing else, but a Beeboorat hastening to a competition set up by Geer'AH. He showed me all that and boasted, spattering and sputtering. I can't think where such idiots come from.
Historians are always racking their brains to try and uncover the origin of the Valorin. It's one of the few unknowns in the history of the Chain of Worlds. The main theory is that a Beeboorat was one day struck by the idea of its ancestry. Terror overwhelmed him, and he rushed to the stadium...

[shrub]
A shrub, as it turns out, is a type of Beeboorat. It lives on and on and on, preparing for war, and then all of a sudden goes wild and no longer understands any words. Then it just hides out in cracks and bites! Hmm, you don't seem to be interested. You can leave, then!
OK, here are some more stories about the shrubs. After a Beeboorat has grown wild, they wrap it in belts and pierce it with barbs so that it won't fight. Then they take it for treatment, to Ogorod. In Ogorod, Oboorez takes care of it and makes it plant peeperettes. What's strange, though, is that nobody ever leaves Ogorod...

[peeperette]
A peeperette is a medicine for raving lunatics and is very much appreciated by the Beeboorats, since they are inclined to various types of lunacy. Peeperettes bring the lunatics back to their normal senses.
Once I tasted a peeperette - disgusting, I tell you! After that stuff, toxick seems like a real treat! But they say ProtoZeek soothed his headaches with peeperettes. Hmm. The ways of ProtoZeek truly are inscrutable!

[Nucleoboom]
A Nucleoboom is an unripe peeperette. Stupid Beeboorats pick them up without letting them mature and then bring them to the stadiums. Ripe peeperettes may calm you, but unripe ones do nothing but agitate an already-cracked mind. Thus affected by Nucleoboom, the Beeboorats do terribly stupid things!
Why are you so interested in Nucleobooms? Are you going to gobble some down and then start a fight? Be careful, or you risk divorce, followed by a dip in a bog!

[Jablees]
Jablee is a seaweed, which sometimes flies around Glorx and grows in plots together with pipetkas. Oboorez tries hard to get rid of them, he pulls them up by the roots, but in vain. It's funny to observe that.
Lo and behold! Once ProtoZeek was sitting in the waters of Glorx, steaming a blister off and blowing bubbles. He would blow and then pop them. It was very beautiful. But some of the bubbles, he missed, and they floated away and turned into Jablees. Then ProtoZeek realized that one must always burst all of one's bubbles!

[Progress]
Progress is a time when everything becomes quiet in VigBoo. All tiptoe round the big cave and tremble. They didn't let me in there, the meanies! Evidently, at this time, Boorawchick generates the one and only thought that shows up during all three cycles!
Stop driving Zeephra up the wall and go back to the Beeboorats. I've got nothing to say to you.

[Heroism]
That's a crazy time for Rubbox wearers! There's real turmoil in Glorx then. Once, they even toppled my mechos over into the water, with My Preciousness inside!
Why, do you still remember that nonsense? Well, the Beeboorats sure know how to drum their ideas into the naive brains of the young!

[Election of the Castaways]
I never quite understood what the difference is between the Election of the Castaways and the Heroism. It's when the PeepShow or the Nuclear War happen, one of those.
It seems to me that at the beginning of this cycle all the crazy ones are easy to pick out, and the bunch starts capturing them in loads. But I need to look that up in my travel notes.

[castaway]
A castaway is a crazy Beeboorat. Haven't you guessed that yet?
To be more precise, it's the castaways that treat themselves with peeperettes rather than shrubs. A shrub is a castaway in a straitjacket. Oh yes, it's really easy to get confused!

[PeepShow]
A PipShow is a harvest of pipetkas by the vangers, who the Beeboorats captured for this purpose. Basically, it's a good idea, 'cos pipetkas help the poor things to recover.
Remember, vanger: PeepShow is not only a wacky race but also a sacred Softie sacred word, as well. In ancient days before the Clash, it meant a great gathering in which only a chosen few took part. The silly Beeboorats don't believe in the Softie, despite their use of their words...

[Nuclear War]
Nuclear War is another ritual race of the Beeboorats. No, 'race' is the wrong word for it. A vanger waits for a Nucleoboom to drop on his head. It's really exciting!
The Nuclear War was the Softie's favorite amusement. They used to go to open spaces and gather the bonuses falling onto their heads. The foolish Beeboorats have continued this tradition without knowing anything of its real meaning.

[Geer'ah]
Geer'ah is a very rude, ill-mannered blockhead. He nearly killed me with his piece of metal when I tried to direct him to take ProtoZeek's life as an example for his own. His head is stuffed with mad ideas of how to torture his fellow tribesmen!
I don't even want to think of him. When he's stuffed with Kernoboos he starts wailing songs and swinging heavy things to and fro. If you knew what he does to the poor Beeboorats!.. I'd better keep it back.

[Boorawchick]
A curious creature, full of energy. Other Beeboorats dread him to death, since he's always threatening them with the Buro's punishment. Boorawchick regularly proclaims laws and by-laws and then immediately revokes them afterwards.
He's the only Beeboorat ever seen outside Glorx. Quite thought-provoking. Actually, he's very cowardly by nature. Once before visiting VigBoo I smeared my claws with toxick, and he almost died of fright! He just huddled in a crack and screamed. It took an arm and a leg to talk him out of there...

[Oboorez]
An old scabby fogey. He has seen a lot and remembers loads of things. He's harmless, just scared and confused by Boorawchick. You can have a pretty normal conversation with him.
I made up my mind to start the enlightment of the Beeboorats with him by teaching him WeeZyk's doctrine. I left a poponka for him to study. At first he didn't want to take it, but I managed to pursuade him. It would be nice if you went and saw him and greeted him from me.

[The Buro]
Ah, the Buro... That's a mysterious thing. The Beeboorats are very much afraid of it, although they've never seen it. Its decisions are regularly announced, by Boorawchick exclusively. These Beeboorats are very weird. They've never seen the Buro, but they believe in it. But when I showed them an icon of ProtoZeek, they wouldn't believe...
I've got an idea about that. The Buro is a Board of beebs which governs the Beeboorats. The beebs are tiny, and that's why nobody notices them. And Boorawchick is a disguised beeb. This explanation fits all the facts perfectly!

[Slave]
A Slave is a vanger recently caught by the Beeboorats. It's a forlorn creature that still remembers its free life, before it was darkened by the Rubbox.
I don't delve into the Beeboorats' affairs that much...

[Commissar]
Hmm, a Commissar... It seems to me that's a beeb who's been run over by a Slave in a mechos. I can't quite remember, though...
I just remembered! The Softie ordered the Commissars to dig the Passages. ProtoZeek had twelve Commissars, but they didn't survive the Clash...

[Agent]
An Agent is a vanger banished by the Beeboorats into the wilderness, once it's no longer needed or has been caught filching Nucleobooms.
Stop asking silly questions! Go study the popons!

[Manual]
ProtoZeek willed all the bios to compose popons so they wouldn't forget him. The stupid Beeboorats got it all wrong, and instead they write manuals. What crass ignorance!
Distorted popons! These manuals are good-for-nothing, especially since the Beeboorats can't read!

[ZeePa]
ZeePa is the main escave in the Chain of Worlds. ProtoZeek built it last and then bequeathed it to us, the Zeexen. Here he wrote his last popons. Since then, ZeePa has been the main source of popons.
I'll tell you an awful secret: ZeePa is situated over a former Passage through which the cursed Cryspo came to the Chain of Worlds. ProtoZeek sealed it with an escave and warned us to be cautious and let no Cryspo back through. But recently I've sensed strange vibrations in ZeePa's walls...

[B-Zone]
Hmm.. Once, ProtoZeek was splashing about in the Necross bogs on his single leg. His every footprint was submerged instantly in slosh, which upset ProtoZeek. He feared that after his departure, he would be forgotten by everyone... No, I can't go on, I'm crying... Come back later...
Finally, on the edge of the world, ProtoZeek managed to leave a footprint which stayed. ProtoZeek was surprised and rejoiced, then dug an escave on that spot. ProtoZeek named that place 'B-Zone', which means 'Place of Remebrance'. Now this once-glorious escave is going through some hard times...

[Zeephra]
Hey, wheeler! You must have gone crazy! I see the Beeboorats's efforts have not been wasted. I am Zeephra, your wife and counselor! You mustn't ever forget that. Also, remember that ProtoZeek directed the vangers to serve the Zeexen for eternity...
I, Zeephra, I am the gentlest of the Softie, the eldest daughter and WeeZyk's wife. I am the guardian of the faith and the protector of B-Zoners.
It's us, the counselors of ZeePa, who are charged with the mission to prepare for the return of the Softie. When WeeZyk was alive he was laughed at by the fools. Only with us did he find comfort...

[Zeekatrix]
What? Zeekatrix? We should be gentle with it, as well as with the other B-Zoners. They are Zeexen by birth, and their only fault is ignorance. I'm sure that Zeekatrix reads the popons and dreams of coming back under ProtoZeek's wing. It is only her pride that prevents her.
Since ancient times, the B-Zone counselors have envied our special closeness to ProtoZeek and been terribly jealous of it. ProtoZeek wrote to us - his daughters and wives - popons full of wise, warm words. Later, we started writing them too and sending them to B-Zone, but all in vain...

[toxick]
Toxick is a very useful thing on that moist Necross. The feeble-minded Zeekatrix dreams of poisoning us with it, but she doesn't know that the Softie were always intoxicating one another and nothing terrible ever happened.
It only boosted their image in their husbands' eyes! That's why we don't interfere. We're just happy that the Softie are still alive!
Don't you know that ProtoZeek taught the Zeexen how to make toxick? The swamp mud is very sticky and can stuff up your ears in the wink of an eye. So his wives would always keep clean and neat, he created this wonderful mixture. Later, it turned out that toxick was also a good poison. So now you know!

[popon]
Composing popons has been the main occupation of the ZeePa counselors since ages ago. ProtoZeek trained us to write them properly. He wanted to enlighten all the bios and the beebs, but we turned out to be the most capable and the cleverest of all. Now I write them to remind the B-Zoners of what they have lost.
After their creation, the bios were slow-witted and forgot what they had to do. ProtoZeek decided to help them and made clay plates with advice for them. But the dummies were too lazy to read them, so everything has been done haphazardly ever since. Only the Zeexen studied them diligently.

[ProtoZeek]
ProtoZeek was a great Softie and a bios creator. His deeds were so numerous that one could pave a double-layer road from ZeePa to B-Zone with popons describing them and still not run out! He was the only one who could survive the Clash. The Cryspo, impressed by his magnitude, dared not touch him.
After he had created the bios, ProtoZeek wandered around the Chain of Worlds for quite a long time, bringing knowledge to his creations. But obviously the material he used for creating the bios had gone bad, and the bios didn't understand their creator.
Only we, the Zeexen, his favorites, remember ProtoZeek. He's gone, but he has promised to return.

[Spring]
Spring is the time for a ritual race dedicated to ProtoZeek. Only the worthy may participate in it, and only the most worthy wins. At this time, ProtoZeek's spirit descends to Necross and is gladdened by his faithful worshipers.
Spring was the time for the Softie to act. They asked ProtoZeek impatiently when he was going to scoop up a new Passage, and he replied: 'We'll start in Spring, guys!' Since then, Spring means 'ProtoZeek is coming!'

[December]
Want to find out about the cycles? Listen here, then. The first of the bios were so utterly thick-headed that when you were lucky enough to make them do anything, they would do it until they fell dead.
Because of that, ProtoZeek always had to return to them and give them a good kick to get them to stop working. Well, that's enough for now.
Now listen to the rest of the story. To his regret, apart from the kicks, WeeZyk couldn't find any other way to make them change from work to rest. And so, he hacked around the worlds from one bios to another, spanking the bios and regulating their work.
After his departure the cirt maintained his doings. Still, only the Softie were flawless.

[Saturday]
Oh, after ProtoZeek's solemn arrival in B-Zone, we normally rest and get ready to write the popons. We knead clay and kill the beebs with toxick. Popons must be composed in a clean atmosphere, without any fuss or ado.
Long ago, the Softie made Saturday for rest and preparations, and we don't want to break that tradition. By the way, ProtoZeek hated being distracted on Saturday!

[Zeeklope]
Zeeklope was a great educational trip by ProtoZeek to B-Zone. Here's what happened: Once Big Boo and ProtoZeek decided to cross stings. The stupid Boo took his out immediately, and it was huge! ProtoZeek was more nimble, though, and managed to stab Boo. Interesting, isn't it?
Listen further. WeeZyk snapped at BigBoo's sting and took off as fast as possible from that mad-horn. Meantime the raffa were driving down the road. They sheltered WeeZyk in their bays, passing it from one to another whilst Boo was ransacking all of them. In honour of this heavenly rescue of WeeZyk we arrange Zyklope.

[Weexow]
Here is one legend. When WeeZyk once got tired while digging Passages and took a nap, some envious Softie pinched his magic stick and decided to build a Passage themselves. But as the jostlers were small and suffered from hydrophobia, the world they opened was tiny and all submerged in water.

[Boozeena]
After the Clash, ProtoZeek decided to hide his wonderful stick, lest anyone dig a Passage and let some wild beasts like the Cryspo out. He opened a new world and, in the very middle of it, he buried his tool and cast a spell on it. Then, he built some statues to scare any wanderers away.

[Threall]
While he was creating the Chain of Worlds, ProtoZeek bumped into a mysterious world of the Infernals. These were very strange creatures. ProtoZeek scorched his leg on Threall, so he told everyone to be careful there...

[hMok]
hMok is a very bad place. A Softie once violated ProtoZeek's prohibition to go to Threall and lost his mind there! He gained a power from the Infernals which he couldn't manage. ProtoZeek opened a special world and imprisoned the maniac there, where he later died.

[Khox]
While creating the Chain of Worlds, ProtoZeek came across a world of Softie who were unknown to him. There were no inhabitants, only some strange structures. This scared ProtoZeek, and he sealed the Passage to this world, thus plunging it into darkness and making all wanderers steer clear of it...

[Ark-a-Noi]
After the Clash, some of the beebs stuffed themselves with Cryspo parts and started growing and going berserk. They began to pounce on everyone, without exception. So, ProtoZeek decided to drive them out into a separate world, after losing a toe in the process. This world is called Ark-a-Noi.

[Protractor]
The envious Softie made their own stick to open Passages. They broke off a bit of ProtoZeek's magic stick and placed it into their device. But their stick couldn't open the Passage. So the envious Softie threw away the no-good tool - which we call the Protractor - and fled to Xplo to escape derision.

[Mechanical Messiah]
You know, after the bargain between ProtoZeek and the Infernals, the latter got half of the power over the vangers and now use it for their own dark, horrible business. The Infernals invented the Mechanical Messiah as a symbol of one who treads their path. Don't go to the Infernals, my dear, I beg you!

[Function-83+]
One smart Softie invented a tool which could get you to another world, bypassing the Passage! He used a bit of ProtoZeek's magic stick. His plan would have worked, if not for his idea to free a crazy prisoner from hMok. He failed, and the tool was recovered by ProtoZeek and preserved for the vangers.

[Chomper]
When the lunatic imprisoned on hMok dropped dead, the Infernals force left his body and started flying around the worlds searching for another.
ProtoZeek made a figurine from clay resembling a Softie and entrapped the evil spirit in it. Ever since then, the Chomper promises to show the Softie world to the one who sets it free. But it's a treacherous liar!

[Boot Sector]
The Infernals help the vangers, as their co-creators. The Boot Sector is their creation. Don't you be scared - the tool is harmless and has been tested by many of my hubbies. They all died, but certainly not because of it.

[Flymatic]
Flymatic and Boot Sector are the vangers' gifts from the Infernals, from whom they originate. They know what sort of clay they are made of and how to use them.

[The Spectators]
These are the Softie-renegades, the prisoners of Xplo. They are ProtoZeek's competitors, those who didn't want to help him dig the Passages. The rumors say that the Cryspo failed to get at them during the Clash. But we believe that ProtoZeek was the only Softie who survived. He always said that!

[The Infernals]
They are mysterious creatures and must be very mighty, since the Cryspo didn't gulp them down. They helped WeeZyk to create vangers, that's why we glorify them. But all the bios fear them... Why, don't you like your wife Zeephra? For WeeZyk's sake, forget about the Infernals, if you wish I'll wash my ears...

[Parapheen]
Parapheen is the name of an apostate. That's what the main Spectator, the one most envious of ProtoZeek, was called. He made the Protractor in the hopes of outshining ProtoZeek. Some say he can be found on Spobs. But beware! It all of this is true, the Spectator will destroy you since you are ProtoZeek's favored one!

[Spobs]
A cursed escave on Xplo. The legends say the Spectators hid there. No bios has ever lived there, even though the inhabitants of the Chain of Worlds never pass up a chance to occupy a suitable hole... For ProtoZeek's sake, don't go there!

[Carmane]
In his early popons, ProtoZeek mentioned that this was the name of an Infernal. Quite a nice name! But I hope my dutiful hubby won't ever need to say it again...


B-Zone

[quotha]
Look here, head case, what I want to say is... well, I don't know why, but I don't need you any longer. You'd better get going while the going's good...
Go ahead, non-stop, vanger. The Zeexen don't need you now...

[Empty Question]
Didn't catch that! What did you say, you garbage?

[Empty Molecule]
Gosh, my sides are killing me from laughing. It's time you went about your work.

[Block Molecule:B]
Hold on, you zealous warrior, I'm not done yet!

[Out Molecule:B]
Get out of here!

[Dead Molecule]
Don't forget us, vanger. Zeekatrix was here once...

[WeeZykVanger Arrival]
Look here, another loony vanger baked in clay has arrived from those obsessed zeepo... Indeed, Spring has come. You know what they say: Saturday night, vangers are tight. 
Poor thing, scared stiff of that kidney-buster! What the heck! Come on now, get out, we are kind... Another ProtoZeek showing up? Well hi, your guinea-pig honor. Where on earth does Zeephra manage to dig out such fools as you! 
It's fun to pluck vangers out of clay, though. Some of them even try to imitate the notorious Inner Voice. Others, those who are well acquainted with Beeboorats, don't kick - they have gone through thick and thin and get it finally! 
So, how did you find traveling inside that cheap statuette for that meathead zeepo? Can't remember anything? Small wonder: it was dark in there, wasn't it? I wouldn't expect a gripping story from you. 
Let's discuss your future, though. The thing is that B-Zone isn't a charitable escave, nor can we provide every new vanger cheated by our aunties with a swell mechos. Sorry, it's your problem. 
But throwing you away into the swamp doesn't make sense either: smart guys like you bring nice thingies into our burrow. And that building material - popons - who would bring them to us? 
We like building various useful pyramids of them, you know. What else is this clay rubbish good for? It's a pity, the popons dry out so soon and only dust and slurry are left of them by Saturday. 
It's settled, then. Here is a present for you: an excellent, strong mechos. Pop in now and then, remember who saved you! No doubt, your mechanism is small, but isn't it quick and bouncy? A smart vanger like you will travel up and down half the Chain in the wink of an eye. 
Oh, yes, that reminds me: if asked where you've been, say that you were at Zeekatrix's. Everyone should know the old witch. Well, off you go now, traveler...

[HolyVanger Arrival I:G]
Hi, wheeler! Your face doesn't ring a bell. Don't remember you. 
Gee, you are a saint! What luck! Look here, get over to rich Zeephra on the double. She'll pay a lump sum for your gift. We'll meet later, when you return on a huge gleaming mechos which she is sure to give you for your uniqueness. Off you go to ZeePa!

[HolyVanger Arrival II:G]
You again? Why didn't you go to Zeephra? Got lost on Necross, poor thing? Try harder and don't run away from your fortune! It's only now that you are unique; once the cycle changes Zeephra won't pay a rotten beeb for you!
Don't miss your chance: hurry over to ZeePa without stopping to meet your fate. If you are fast, you'll get loads of beebs for your halo.

[HolyVanger Arrival III:G]
Well, you are a deep one, tramp! Hi, twice-dead vanger, I'm Zeekatrix... 
Smart of you to have suspected a trick in my words. There's no telling with you who's smart and who's simple. So I send greedy vangers right into Zeephra's tacky claws and let her knock sense into them. 
And then those oafs come back to me in the next Zeeklope, and I have nothing to do but give them a raffa, which isn't very profitable at first glance. 
The thing is that no matter how much we hate each other, Zeephra and I have a silent agreement: I earn a commission for every blockhead I send her. 
Don't think it's for those wretched beebs that I fool the simpletons. Not in the least! We just evenly distribute the resources of the Chain by taking easily gained mechos and weapons away from silly vangers. 
Easy come, easy go. Why, who else would take care of you, fitters? Not the smug Beeboorats and fat Eleepods; they don't give a beeb about vangers. 
They are too slow to realize who rules in the Chain: those who bring cirt and goods so that the others can sit cozily in their escaves waiting for summer to come. 
You can't imagine what fun it is to watch a vanger rush for beebs-for-nothing and then pull that wretched thing out of the trash... Not all of you know the laws of the Chain yet... 
Don't be angry with Zeekatrix. As soon as you are one of the Strivers, I will help you. Those ugly zeepos identify newcomers by smell, so I'll coat your mechos with special clay from a softened popon. 
Here you are. Now the nutters are sure to mistake you for their mate, and they'll rush at you with some kisses to boot. But don't you worry: the fools have picked up old Softie's words without ever knowing what they really mean... 
You mustn't think you are my friend forever, though; you still have to earn it. The vangers are a strange breed. I'm famous for seeing you vangers through, and I'll say this: those living underground will never understand those who wheel around with ease. The Creature Soup has separated us forever.

[Poponka Delivery:G]
Thanks for the popons, thank you indeed, vanger. We use them differently, but what does that matter? In skilled hands, a popon can come in very handy. Sometimes, though, such a feeling of yearning comes over you in December that you sit down and read it all the way through! 
And these stories are not devoid of beauty, I must say, even though they're nothing but the fantasies of those slow, backwards zeepos. The others around here are no better, though.

[Toxick in Inventory:B]
You are mistaken, stranger, we are boiling toxick to deliver it to ZeePa to exterminate all the crushing bores there! Toxick is a good cure for stupidity. So take it up to Zeephra quick!

[Zyklope Winner I:G]
Hi, ProtoZeek's master. We are just finishing up construction on another exit from B-Zone, so such a huge lump of clay will come in handy. 
Let me just extract the vanger caught by Zeephra out of this statuette. You know that your pal, the poor thing, was baked inside this heap by the zeepos? I don't think you feel bad for him, though. You vangers don't give a fig about others, you don't have bunches... 
You are nimble, aren't you! Zeephra likes holding Zeeklope, a race with that ProtoZeek. And she always sends several vangers hoping that that way the load will be delivered safer and faster... 
We make little profit off this cargo, but I have never made a mistake when staking the wheeler who won the Necross race. Even without knowing, the zeepos help us select true vangers.

[Key to Xplo Gift:G]
I see that you tried hard and for that I will reward you with the key to the last abandoned world: Xplo. Mostly Larvae live there, you see what I am hinting at? All of us are slaves to cirt, such is the legacy of our ancestors. Although Zeexen's mind is alive, our body serves these underground skunks. 
Take cirt to ZeePa, as they alone can distill it into a special concentrate. Did you ever think about why only the main escaves need cirt? Chain dwellers prefer to keep mum rather than disclose their intimate secrets to rough creatures like you... 
And I don't plan on it either. Be happy with what you have: you can get to Xplo, the world of Departed Bios...

[Zyklope Winner II:G]
Well, vanger, you like playing around with ProtoZeek, I see. It proves again that you are unique: not everyone can win Zeeklope, and you've done it twice now! 
Now I see that you are not a simpleton. Here in the escave you feel that there is no one to talk and open your heart to. Having a laugh or tittle-tattle, yes you are welcome... Few Zeexen are interested in what's going on up there. or even inside. 
As for cirt, the secret of distilling cirt into a ready-to-use concentrate was invented by one of the first Departed Bios. Then it got into several escaves, which later became the bases for bunches. It's only there that they need cirt, and the rest of the escaves directly depend on the will of their centers. 
The main escaves feed their neighbors, otherwise they would have died out long ago. B-Zone is no exception. Unfortunately, we are dependent on these pseudo-softie: the secret of the Chain is that from time to time the main escaves pass portions of precious cirt concentrate over to their brethren. 
But this is too precious a secret to be told to dodgy vangers. That's why it's done secretly: usually passengers who ask to be taken to the other end of the world are used for that. They are the ones who carry the medicine along... 
I hear that sometimes Beeboorats hide secret parcels in the cheeks of their heroes and shrubs.

[Zyklope Winner III:G]
You brought ProtoZeek again? Maybe you are a maniac and I shouldn't have spilled the beans to you. Tough guys you are, indeed.

[Zyklope Loser:B]
Couldn't bring the present from those nutty zeepos, could you, loser vanger? Try again; we love amusing ourselves. 
Zeeklope is the funniest event on Necross. Loads of the so-called Zeephra's 'husbands' get onto the road and start quarreling, trying to rob each other of the zeepo Zeexen's nonsensical fruit of imagination, the symbol of their ProtoZeek. 
I have to admit, though: you have to be quite a skillful mechos driver to snatch away that chunk of clay from the greedy suitors of that goggle-eyed Zeex. 
And now you are of no use, sad sack. Nobody in the Chain needs a dunce like you. There's a terrific swamp nearby, a nice place for you to have a rest in.

[Zyklope Harrier:B]
Got lost, duffer? You are so puffed out that there's no mistaking it: you are in the Zeeklope. But ProtoZeek hasn't reached us yet, blast him! 
You must have been so scared of your rivals that you dashed here without a backward glance. But it's not just a race, you slob: you must deliver that funny statuette here. It has a silly vanger inside that you must have been like once. March, botcher!

[MP0 Start]
Hey man, wake up! Vangers have arranged a VAN-WAR on Necross and are kicking each other around like crazy! It's a cool show this time, almost like a mini Clash. But I'm sure that without a plucky guy like you it's kinda boring up there. Get out of this hole and scatter all those wretches with your awe-inspiring appearance!

[MP1 Start]
Go load toxick and popons into your crate and remember the shortcuts between the Necross escaves. The MECHOSOMA has started! Whoever delivers his wads of goods first will be the winner. You can get it anywhere, even in the bogs, and the clever Zeexen will calculate everything.

[MP2 Start]
Are you frozen in place? We're having a PASSEMBLOSS here! Rip your wheels off the clay, crank up your rattletrap, and catch up to the big race. Don't think they'll wait for you at a checkpoint. It's a glowing circle on the road, in case you've forgotten...

[MP3 Start]
HUNTAGE started!

[MP4 Start]
MUSTODONT started!

[MP0 Comment]
The VAN-WAR is in full swing while you're sitting here, yellow belly. See how clay is crumbling from the shots and yells? Come on, go up there quickly and give it to them hot. And take a bigger gun. Should they by any chance take you down, your faithful wife will seek revenge for you upon the scoundrels.

[MP1 Comment]
The MECHOSOMA is going full blast. My store is full and those traffickers keep bringing more and more. Are you tired? Cheer up, victory is near! Another lot and my escave will fall apart from all the goods...

[MP2 Comment]
How's the PASSEMBLOSS going? You're not the only one who went astray; it's as easy as shelling peas. The PASSEMBLOSS isn't for greenhorns that can only hang around near escaves and trample beebs. The glowing circles on the road are hard to notice, I agree. But you must try hard. Once you've reached one checkpoint, go to the next. Your compass will show you the way - not a big deal, huh?

[MP3 Comment]
HUNTAGE in progress...

[MP4 Comment]
MUSTODONT in progress...

[Cirt in Inventory]
Wow, cirt has been brought for us to try. Where did you get it, you plucky guy? Must have scared a poor raffa stiff with your gun. Come on, I'm kidding. But we can't take the cirt, we aren't authorized. We have a rare disease that we caught from you, you Zeexen killer. We may die soon... 
Take the cirt to ZeePa and give our last regards to Zeephra. Her dream has come true at last, let her rest from copying popons: we decided to lay our hands on our chests and turn up our toes like the glorious Softie. Remember to remind her: she should send a companion to assume the post, or at least it's high time she did.

[BadCirt in Inventory:B]
Hold on, wheeler, I'd like to say something important to you. You've been making a bad impression lately, like a sapless ProtoZeek. After you dropped in on us, our spirits drooped and we don't feel like making fun of popons anymore... 
Do something with yourself, would you? Paint your mechos with polka-dots or something. Or catch a mischievous beeb.

[GoodCirt in Inventory:G]
You are a good sport - Zeekatrix knows what's what with vangers. She can sense what amuses and what abuses. It's because I've grown under the supervision of a great vanger. He used to bring such loads of cirt that one could feed a whole hatch of greedy zeepos on it for a whole cycle. 
Zeekatrix knows her cirt, and has been invited as a counselor to ZeePa more than once. But there are such killjoys there! She'd rather live here and chat with nice vangers like you.

[Larva in Inventory]
Hey, vanger, didn't you notice that a Larva jumped into your mechos?! What a gawk you are! Must have been hiccupping or scratching yourself non-stop. But you are lucky, nitwit. Larvae seldom crawl up onto the curb. Normally they sit in the bog and chirp away. 
What should I do now? Take this precious booty to Zeephra quickly. She is an expert in Larvae, even though she is from ZeePa. You know where her talent stems from? Oh, that's an edifying story: when Zeephra was little, the very first Larva was brought to her family. 
But she ground through the conlarver, broke out, and managed to bite everyone who was there. Poor Zeephra got the worst of it, so she never forgot the lesson. She knows what's what with Larvae like no one else in the Chain. Go now, but watch the load carefully. Good luck!

[Nymbos in Inventory]
Oh, vanger, take care. If nymbos stays too long in your bay, huge vile beebs will hatch from it and eat you up, lock, stock, and barrel. Forewarned is forearmed, you know, and I love you. Loads of vangers have perished because they forgot to clean up the bay. Cleanliness breeds security.

[Phlegma in Inventory:G]
Hooray, the phlegma is here. A new toxick will soon surprise everyone in ZeePa, Zeephra especially. She's lost her trust in Zeekatrix's ability to play tricks, and with this Fostral stuff she'll be scared out of her wits and wings.

[Heroin in Inventory]
How did you manage to pinch this pet, the favorite of Geer'ah? What a deft vanger you are! You should know though, that Valorins are to Geer'ah as vangers are to Zeephra. He is very upset and is busy hiring killers to get even with the thief. You can stay at my place until it's over, I won't betray you. 
Let's have fun in the meantime. See that wart on him? If you press it hard, a hole opens on the other side. Drip some fresh toxick in there. 
Hear that? What a sound! I am crazy about such shrill notes, they make me think of the sense of the universe... Another drop... O-oh, what a burst of memories from my childhood. Beeboorat heroes are so romantic, I think...

[Shrub in Inventory:G]
Oh, what a wonderful shrub! His moans are so melodic! I've been dreaming for so long of planting one at the entrance to B-Zone to gladden the vangers who come here with its petals. But the shrubs don't grow well here on Necross, we have to use fertilizers. Bring me some phlegma, will you?

[eLeech in Inventory]
Let me have a look at your eLeech, vanger. No mistake, Leepky's gross snout shows. Thanks for the worm, trader. It'll be great bait for the local bog monsters. One of them is driving us crazy with its croaking on Saturdays; it's time we caught the stinker...

[Kernoboo in Inventory]
Stoked up with victuals for the road, tramp? In fact, Nucleobooms are no good for such a plucky warrior like you to feed on. Give them to me, I'll soak the fruit in toxick. Zeekatrix knows what's what in cooking! All your sorrows and gloomy desires will vanish in a trice.

[Pipetka in Inventory]
Mind you, farmer, if you've made up your mind to grow peeperettes, I can offer some advice! The main thing is: don't attempt to plant them on Necross, as they won't sprout. 
First you must erect fortifications made from mechos debris to protect peeperettes from greedy beebs. Then in the spring dig deep underground and dump your peeperettes there. Start dancing around like jablees flying by, otherwise the peeperettes will smell a rat...

[Protractor in Inventory]
Zeekatrix can see the glorious Protractor. Did you decide to paint all the worlds with its intricate symbols? Or are you setting up a farm to grow beebs? What I wouldn't advise is for you to go to Spobs... I hear a crazy lone Larva lives there, gobbling up mechos like mad.

[Mechanic Messiah in Inventory:B]
What a disgusting toy you've brought, vanger. That's Mechanical Messiah! I don't feel like playing with it. It's as nasty as you are, jack pudding.
There's hearsay that this thingy has something to do with the Clash and the Creature Soup, which mutilated our world. Take Zeekatrix's advice and get rid of this pest. 
I can't let you into the escave with this nightmare or you'll curse our entire bunch. Bug off before you bring disaster.

[Function-83 in Inventory:G]
Oh, Function-83+! This thing excites and exhilarates me so much! Once a vanger took me about in his mechos and he had this thingy in his bay. Wow, did we go places and see some wonders! 
In one world my driver was even elected King of the bunch, and I was sent home in a coach with a heap of presents to boot. What fun we had!

[Spummy in Inventory:B]
Hey, dope, wake up! Can't you see that the Chomper has settled in your mechos? Get rid of it quickly before the pest sneaks into our escave and gets into some mischief. How did the Chomper manage to lure you? No wonder, though, if you wander around rubbish dumps. 
Chompers are fond of waylaying absent-minded slobs like you, after which they sneak into defenseless bunches. Don't you know that many from the Departed Bios were eaten by Chompers? Chowed down and left our world... That's why they were called the Departed. No, vice versa, it was the bios who gobbled and the Chompers who left... Or the other way around... 
Well, now I'm confused! My head is spinning and I feel terrible. The long and the short of it is: your find won't leave you in peace, not until you kick the bucket in a ditch or somewhere. There's no room for you in B-Zone, so find somewhere else. Bug off!

[Boot Sector in Inventory:B]
Have you brought Boot Sector, gadder? Once it's started, it gives me a headache, and a splitting one, worse than the one the nasty popons give you when you read too many of them. Zeephra must be scribbling her screeds with Boot Sector.
You don't spare my health, dear heart. I've worn myself out on toxick with clottish vangers hanging around with their rusty, harmful gadgets along with them.

[Peelot in Inventory]
Hey, vanger, are you sure your Flymatic is real? I'll spill the beans to you: Beeboorats make fake Flymatics from mechos wreckage, peeperettes, and seaweed, and then sell them to all sorts of nitwits for a fortune.
Many a twit has woken up in a ditch or a bog after being set up. But nice kind Zeekatrix can carry out an independent assessment just to please your beautiful eyes. Will you leave them to me when you die? Chill out, I know you don't have beautiful eyes. Pity. No eyes, no assessment. Do as you please.

[Zeefick Story I]
Look here, vanger, I have to tell you something confidential. I've been watching you for quite a time now and my conclusion is that you are just the one to execute my grand plan. 
Once when tidying up my burrow I came across a toxick jar with something disgusting in it... 
The jar was labeled: 'ZEEFICK. SOFTIE INSIDE.' It occurred to me at once that there was real true Softie spawn inside! Any Zeex would confirm that long ago that the Softie used to spawn in Necross swamps.
But Departed Bios were fond of their spawn, which is why the Softie died out in the end. 
Now this jar is all that's left. So I thought, why not breed Softies again? It would be great! Each of us would be presented with an escave by the powerful Softie. 
All the zeepos would creep up to us, cap in hand, and we would make them gulp their popons without even washing them down with a drink. Wouldn't that be great? And not a big deal, either. We only need to hatch the spawn. 
The thing is, I have no time for it, and the temperature here is wrong, too. So you go to Ark-a-Noi with Zeefick, which is in just the right climate for hatching Softies.
Enjoy yourself there for three cycles or so, but don't stand still like a zombie or the spawn will thicken! As soon as little Softies hatch out come back to me at once. And watch the bumps; don't shake the babies. Got it? Come on, take Zeefick and off you go.

[Zeefick Story II]
Failed to hatch Softies? Come on, cheer up. Nothing ventured, nothing gained. If something is to be gained, it can be gained at the Eleepods'. They have an incubator in which they hatch eLeeches. Ain't I smart and shrewd? You just have to take Zeefick to the incubator. 
Oh, yeah, take a couple popons with you. The moment Feenger sees them, he'll go mad with joy. 
At the same time leave the Zeefick there. Like my plan? The Softies are sure to hatch in the incubator, there's no doubt about it. No way out for them, anyway. Remember to pop into the incubator as often as possible, though: we can't miss the big event. 
Otherwise the impertinent Eleepods will claim the credit, in which case you'll be the one kneeling before them, hat in hand, while they spit down on you with chewed phlegma. Don't forget it, fitter!

[Boorawchick in Inventory:G]
At last Boorawchick is here! I'm tired of waiting for you. I hear you are my most fervent admirer in all the worlds and a toxick connoisseur. I'm pleased to see you here in B-Zone and I'm ready to share my cooking secrets with you. 
Isn't that why you you've come? I'll tell you this: you get the best toxick from Beeboorat counselors. 
First you stretch them out on Necross to dry, then soak them in the bog, then spread them along the road for vangers to strip into fibers with their wheels. 
After that it's Zeekatrix's turn to go to work. I see, Boorawchick, you are itching to get started. Come on, be honest, do you want to take part in the next boiling in person? Don't shiver, you'll do it all right. 
You'll damage my whole store with your shaking, you brute! Hey, driver, take the client away, he's too boisterous. And the smell! Up you go, and be quick!

[Lawn Mower part note]
I want to tell you my story, truth-seeker. Only the most intimate vangers are permitted to know it, the ones who are experts at their trade. 
I used to be a vanger once too - don't be surprised. I was known in the worlds as the Damned Hornet. Beeboorats feared me like the plague. 
I could easily take out a truck with just a MacHOTine! But then I had to retire, as I sprained a finger by pulling the trigger - this one.
In those days I had the Lawn Mower mechos. It's gone now, filched piece by piece and taken to different worlds by ill-wishers. 
Wheezer fits it, or at least a part of it does. Get a load of me! Zeekatrix knows a thing or two about mechos!

[Wormaster part note]
I'll tell you a grave and scary secret. Once, the walls of our escave began shuddering and then collapsed. When I came down I saw a strangely-designed mechos stuck in the breach. It was called Wormaster. It turned out that, nutty Zeephra hired some moonlighter to sneak into B-Zone and destroy everything in the hole with toxick. But something failed and the burglar gave up. We kept his mechos to make up for the damage. Then we sold it in bits and pieces so that no other idiot could get hold of it. The only thing I remember is that Husker is one of its parts.

[Weexow visit]
You must have been bugged by Eleepods, that's why you were in Weexow. It looks like some underwater kusowocks are growing there; the worms go crazy around them.
Have mercy on the fatties: don't pander to their bad habits, and don't take them any wet kusowocks.

[Boozeena visit]
What did you bring me from Boozeena? Nothing special... Did you know that all those symbols and letters used to hang over the entrance to B-Zone to give all sorts of useful information?
But pilfering vangers ripped them off, taking them away to their beloved Boozeena and their ancient vanger gods. Bring it all back to me and you'll be rewarded!

[Ark-a-Znoy visit]
I see you've been to Ark-a-Noi already. Did anybody send their regards to me? No? Strange... Are you sure you were in that glowing world?
A charming little glow-worm lives there. We would discuss the meaning of life with him.

[Khox visit]
Congratulations, vanger. Welcome back from Khox. Its dwellers, the invisible Beeboorats, trick strangers into traps and then cause a blackout. When it gets pitch dark, they attack the mechos. Savages they are, indeed.

[hMok visit]
Well, a corpse has come from hMok. Don't be surprised! You may think you are alive, but it's an illusion. Try going into a bog, as those who return from hMok don't sink, seeing as how they can't be killed. But they ain't alive either.

[Threall visit]
Oh, the best friend of the Infernals has come from Threall. Slightly smoked, though. Never mind, it's just what Infernals love... eating! They can even boil you in lava to soften the mechos. Go back soon, they are tired of waiting for you there on Threall. They're using searchlights to look for you.

[Eleepod in Inventory]
Hey, vanger, spare your mechos! Just fancy him carrying a heavy Eleepod through two worlds! But the worm seems to have enjoyed it: look how he rolled his eyes. 
Never mind, guy. I'll bring you back to life. Stay with me and stir toxick with your tail... And when it comes off we'll sew on some good long seaweed, imported from Glorx, instead.

[Beeboorat in Inventory]
Hey, vanger, sell me the Beeboorat from your bay. What a wonderful specimen; I can't tear my eyes off him. He'll be the pride and glory of my Glorx Studies Lab. I have a vast research plan! 
To begin with, I will soak the Beeboorat in toxick, that's the most important  thing. After that, I can start studying reflexes. The equipment is ready.

[Zeex in Inventory]
An edifying mission from ZeePa, that's what it is! There's no calming Zeephra down. Even toxick won't work on the pest. Well, what do you want, mate? To preach a sermon? Come on, go ahead. I'll gather a meeting for you, we haven't had fun in ages. ZeePa alone saves us from boredom. 
On second thought, maybe you're here on a secret mission? That would be great, because we are not busy. In that case, come this way, into this hole. We'll have a talk there.

[Boozeena Code]
Hold on, you daredevil of a vanger. Look how you've worn out your passenger. She can hardly move a paw or raise her eyes. 
Murmuring something... $(Boozeena Secret Code)... Well, that sounds like a tinker's cussing. Yeah, Zeexen are good at that kind of lingo. Something about Boozeena, too. She's on her last legs!

[Larvae Vision note:G]
Well, hearse-rider, congrats! Your high Dominance has become a scary story that the wheelers tell each other. By the way, now your mechos can see Larvae as well as the other vangers. Watch out: don't ride over her tail, as you can't sew it back on...


-B-Zone- Q&A

[mechos]
Heaps of junk! Some vangers drive those things around. Have you heard about them before? Well, the historical Softie had nothing to do with them. The Softie used to throw away waste which the vangers later used to made mechos.

[Fostral]
Fostral used to be a huge garbage dump the Softie once made. In fact, they opened this world for that reason. There used to be so much garbage that it was spilling through the Passages into other worlds! This made the scavengers lock the Passages with secret passwords.

[Eleepods]
Well, Fostral used to be a huge dump. The Softie had discarded some terribly poisonous muck there. The worms rooting about in the rubbish heap began swelling and developed the scratchers, and so, after much time had passed, the Eleepods appeared. The beasts' lust for scribbling is the worst side effect of their being poisoned.

[Leepky]
Listen to the story of how Leepky became counselor. Once, the other Eleepods decided to give him a beating for calling them names. Fear drove him into the counselor's cave, where he ate up all the phlegma stored there and so was doomed to stay there forever. Since then, all of the vangers have become sick of his conceited snout.

[Podish]
Podish produces the worst of the vangers, no doubt. With everyone claiming to be a great poet, there's no one to clean the place up or watch the offspring. And what a ruckus! Just imagine it, everyone trying to outshout one another, flapping their scratchers and spitting phlegma everywhere...

[escave]
The escave? Well, to tell the truth, I'm sick and tired of it. Going off and seeing the world with beautiful vangers is a much more pleasant thing to do. Escaves used to be madhouses, built by the Softie. The most violent inmates were kept in there, so they tried to put them as deep underground as possible.

[pod]
In this universe, there's nothing more scary than a pod - a flock of Eleepods that have gone wild. They spend their time digging underground corridors and traps. You're walking along, minding your own business, then, all of a sudden - bang!
The ground disintegrates beneath you, and before you can say Jack Robinson you're being gnawed on by their dribbling jaws. Hey, stop trembling. The pods can't get you here.

[bunch]
A Bunch are a group of those darned escave dwellers. The only fun they ever have is fighting, cirt and, if they're lucky, Larva. But free vangers are another kettle of fish. They don't give a beeb about bunches, and rightly so.

[The Chain]
The Chain of Worlds is as vast as Zeephra's stupidity. Fostral, Glorx, and Necross aren't even the half of it. There are places where you can get robbed of your own skin before you even notice! But it's much more fun to travel around than to sit in the escave. I'd get in a mechos right now and go wherever it took me if I could!

[Larvae]
Larvae? They're wonderful creatures. So wonderful! The vangers catch Larvae for us. The Larvae produce cirt for us, you know. I have no idea how they do it, and my best guess is a bit inappropriate.

[Beeboorats]
You don't know about Beeboorats? Beeboorats are, well, beebs. They're born big and fat, but on Glorx they've got nothing to eat, so they just get thinner and thinner from hunger, shrinking smaller and smaller, until they reach the size of a beeb. Then they run away to join the others, so you can squash them there.

[Glorx]
Glorx was once the Softie's sewage collector. They made so much waste that a whole world had to be allocated to its disposal!
Later some Cryspo blocked in the sewage holes and the Softie got flooded with dung. Boy, they fought viciously against the Cryspo then! But it didn't help, and in the end there was little left for them to do but retreat.

[raffa]
You're so dense. There are big bios, and there are big vangers. There are beebs, and there are... that's right, raffas! They're hired by the insects. It's hard to be small, you know. Why d'you think Beeboorats make you drive the raffa? To please the beebs, that's why!

[Incubator]
Incubator is the home of the quarrelsome Eleepod. They're awfully envious of the Podish and are obsessed with the idea of driving them away from their cozy spot, so they're always playing dirty tricks on Podishers.
Those Incubator scoundrels catch large-toothed leeches, eLeeches, and send them to Podish. The Podishers put up with this and compose works of satire about Incubator.

[bios]
If only the Softie could have seen where their dumps and breeding mutation experiments would end up! The bios are just the result of their unwise actions. But Zeexen are of a different genealogy. Our ancestors include the Cryspo!

[cirt]
Cirt is essential. It adds a silver lining to the gray clouds of our lives. Once a Larva has rubbed a certain part of her body against the ground, you can collect the cirt left behind and bring it to the bunches who sniff it. Then we just pass the time until the next batch of cirt arrives!

[Feenger]
Eleepod counselors usually end up as counselors in the most absurd and silly ways you can imagine. An eLeech that was supposed to be sent to Podish hid himself away in a crack.
He was growing bigger and bigger, nibbling the old counselor bit by bit. The oaf never noticed it, and the eLeech grew, so eventually Incubator couldn't keep from taking him on as a counselor.

[Passage]
You do know that the Chain of Worlds used to be a huge dump, don't you? Well, the Passages served as holes to let rubbish out. They were made large on purpose so that there wouldn't be any need to saw up the huge lumps of waste into pieces.

[Zeexen]
Zeexen are the only ones who will tell you the whole truth without fleecing you or splashing you with phlegma. I'm the most righteous of all the Zeexen, so you can trust me! See my wings? No other bios have wings this big! They're proof that the Cryspo are our ancestors!

[eLeech]
All you've heard about eLeeches so far is gibberish. Here's the scientific truth: the eLeech is a species of Crooked Crawling Leech Vulgare that inhabits ditches and feeds on old Eleepods. I once dissected an eLeech in the lab. Incubator sends them in swarms to Podish, as a symbol of friendship, haha.

[nymbos]
I once prepared a specimen in the lab. And what do you think I found out? Nymbos are the fruit of a certain water mold. Once placed in darkness, they burst, producing a stinky gas. Eleepods start craving for it, poor things. The Podish bunch sends them to Incubator along with their best regards.

[Eleection]
Now's the time when the large-toothed eLeeches begin to swarm, and the Incubator Eleepods grab them and put them into sacks. They are then packed and given to vangers to be taken to Podish.
This is the most exciting event of the worms' lives. Imagining what a stir the eLeeches will cause in Podish delights the Eleepods and inspires them to start their malicious munching.

[vangers]
Vangers are very useful animals, able to cope with a mechos all by themselves. Vangers' grubs live only in rusted scrap metal in pools of machine oil, so the best place for them is a destroyed mechos. It's a pretty lucky day for you if you find a vanger! That's enough for now; I'll tell you more later.
After a vanger's grub is brought into an escave, it's the bunch counselor's turn to be in charge of it. He feeds the young vanger and raises it. When the youngster grows up, it is put into a mechos and kicked into action. I've raised quite a few vangers, so I've seen them every step of the way.

[phlegma]
A Phlegma is not as cruel as an eLeech. The Incubator bunch sends slime for the Podish Eleepods to slip on and sprain their scratchers. An Eleepod with a sprained scratcher is an unbearable sight, believe me. Every time phlegma is delivered, all of Podish shakes with the Eleepods' whining and moaning!

[The Softie]
There once lived an enormous wild tribe, greedy and untidy. After they had eaten all they could, including the rotten mire, they began eating another tribe, the Cryspo, out of house and home. The Cryspo put up with this for a while, but once their eggs became the latest victims, they clashed with the Softie. Hence 'the Clash.'

[The Cryspo]
An ancient tribe that lived next to the Softie. It wasn't as big as the Softie, but it was decent and cultured. However, the Cryspo were the victims of bad luck. They were partly eaten by the Softie and partly buried under rubbish, and the rest were trampled down in the Clash. The Zeexen are all that is left of the Cryspo.

[Necross]
Necross is the world where the Softie were stuck. In their new home, they began dumping their waste, as usual. But this time either the climate was wrong or the Cryspo had done their bit, and the stuff went sour and began to thicken. And so the Softie perished in pools of mud and slurry. One of the prouder moments in our history.

[P-beam]
While studying an Eleepod, I discovered an enigmatic hole with a counterclockwise thread in its side. What a strange phenomenon! It looks like Eleepods can fasten to each other like mechos parts. I'll call this Eleepod structure the P-beam!

[Xplo]
When they discovered this world, the Softie found it too small for their waste, and their interest in it soon flagged. There they set up a strong escave, a nuthouse for those who had gone bananas during world exploration.

[Departed Bios]
Oh, they're real nutcakes! Every single one in the bios eventually comes up with the idea that they can collect more cirt from the world than the vangers bring in. The poor morons pour out of their escave and wander around the world until the beebs turn them into dinner. Then their place is later taken by others.

[Plump-up]
It looks like the Podish Eleepods in Plump-up go for the nymbos. They crawl out by a ditch, set their scratchers in the water, and start fishing for nymbos. They're all puffing and pushing since there's not quite enough room. It's quite a sight! Go and see what happens if you push one of the worms into water.

[Gulp-down]
The Gulp-down starts when the eLeeches come to Podish. The worms start panicking. They use the oldest, fattest Eleepod to block the entrance to the escave, and the eLeeches start chomping him. The real fun begins once that Eleepod has been eaten through!

[beebs]
Beebs are degenerated Beeboorats. Their life isn't so bad, though, since it's easier for small creatures to find food. They dig out escaves for themselves and can even hire raffa to do the job for them. A vanger might do some of them in now and then, but that's not a big deal: the Beeboorats make up for it.

[The Creature Soup]
Well, you see, when the bogs began to thicken on Necross, everyone got stuck in them. The Cryspo, the Softie - everyone got all mixed up, with a Softie's paw or a Cryspo's head sticking out here and there or there and here. Whole bogs were packed with body parts jammed together. They called it Creature Soup!

[The Clash]
A long, long time ago, the Softie and the Cryspo fought in the Clash: the former were trying to bury the latter under their rubbish, and the latter were jabbing the former with their stingers. Both the parties succeeded in nearly destroying the other. And the survivors ended up in the Creature Soup, so even they died, too.

[Spiral]
The Softie used spirals to lock Passages and keep others from hanging around. The bios put spirals in mechos so that the vangers could make their cirt deliveries.

[ruBeecation]
An unpleasant procedure, to say the least! But that's what the Beeboorats are like, darn them. They ruBeecate even stray beebs. That's the terrible legacy of the perverted Softie. Beeboorats exhibit all kinds of Softie habits and customs.

[Rubbox]
You've got one of those things on you, too? When I came to the Beeboorats for the first time I was ruBeecated, too. Robbed of my toxick and got this awful Rubbox hung on me. I had to wear it around VigBoo like a fool! I'm pretty sure the Softie marked mechanisms meant for waste with this piece of scrap metal.

[VigBoo]
The capital of the Beeboorat kingdom. I was inside and came to the ultimate conclusion that the Softie once had a sewage system observation post in that spot.

[Lampasso]
Oh, I once spent six cycles in Lampasso studying Beeboorat behavior. There I collected lots and lots of information. Crowds of Beeboorats gather together in the local stadiums to act in a way that's both strange and harmful to their health...

[Ogorod]
A curious place. It's got the largest peeperette plantations in the whole Chain of Worlds. The place is full of sweet smells and the chirping of beebs! And if I ever get sick of B-Zone, I'll move to Ogorod and become a counselor.

[Valorin]
Remember, nitwit, that Valorin is a Beeboorat. You know that Beeboorats shrink with time until they ultimately become as small as beebs. Those failing or unwilling to do so are not worth feeding. They are caught, packed, and taken to Lampasso to be reduced and exploited by force.

[shrub]
Planting shrubs is a beautiful custom that I'd like to introduce here in B-Zone! Sometimes Beeboorats all of a sudden start to imagine they're plants and require watering and tending. Then, they're tearfully and carefully packed and sent to Ogorod, where they are 'welcomed' by the peeperettes.

[peeperette]
As you know, Beeboorats have inherited many of the Softie habits, such as planting all sorts of plants in all sorts of places. Sometimes the right places, but usually the wrong ones. They like to plant various kinds of seeds, but the most popular Beeboorat plant is the peeperette, which grows alongside shrubs.

[Nucleoboom]
Nucleoboom is a popular means of forced miniaturization of Beeboorats, especially in Lampasso. A Beeboorat treated with Nucleoboom may tear its limbs off, crumple, and fold. Geer'ah is very knowledgeable about the ways of using Nucleobooms.

[Jablees]
The Jablees are enigmatic thingies. I think they're Beeboorats germinated in Ogorod. They must have been either improperly looked after or overwatered, which makes them spoil, swell, and fly away with an armful of peeperettes, scattering them around Glorx.

[Progress]
You'd better keep away from Boorawchick for a while, or you're asking for trouble. It's time for him to pick subjects for forced miniaturization.

[Heroism]
This is the rotation that Geer'ah from Lampasso has been wanting to come so badly. Oodles of convicts thirsty for Nucleobooms have been gathering in his stadiums.

[Election of the Castaways]
I don't remember, exactly. But that's when the peeperettes reach maturity.

[castaway]
A castaway is a Beeboorat who has started to think he's a plant. He bugs the bunch to such an extent that they have no choice but to get rid of him. Vangers take these specimens to Ogorod as shrubs, having to listen to their nagging and sighing the whole way.

[PeepShow]
The PeepShow is a ritual race on Glorx. I once took part in it, and boy was it fun! My driver followed the Jablees, speeding like mad, while I was busy grabbing peeperettes and tossing them in. They said we were the best crew in Ogorod!

[Nuclear War]
Nuclear War was the Softie's favorite tactic to use against the Cryspo. They would collect the worst of harmful, smelly rubbish and dump it on their enemies' heads. There were never any survivors...

[Geer'ah]
Geer'ah is the most inquisitive, educated Beeboorat, and we came to an agreement with him quite quickly. The noble researcher studies the possibilities of physical therapy in his stadiums in Lampasso.

[Boorawchick]
This poor thing has had the worst luck! Like every adult Beeboorat, he began to shrink when the time came. Once he had shrunk to half-size, an absent-minded vanger slammed him in a door, interrupting the natural process so that now Boorawchick is neither a beeb nor a Beeboorat.

[Oboorez]
Let me tell you something confidential: Oboorez used to be a shrub! He was brought here to Ogorod, planted and watered, and had a peeperette inserted. I spilled some toxick nearby, just for the sake of an experiment, and the peeperette failed to sprout! Oboorez's wrappings had to be removed, and he was left in Ogorod.

[The Buro]
The Buro is Boorawchick's invention. It's a big iron barrel, painted brightly and decorated with seaweed. Boorawchick gets inside and starts yelling crazy orders everywhere, and the silly Beeboorats prostrate themselves in terror and obey!

[Slave]
Ask the one who paints and gives out the Rubboxes.

[Commissar]
I think the Softie used to use this name for their chief dump investigators. The Beeboorats must have discovered some ancient scribbling and decided to show off their knowledge...

[Agent]
As far as I know, an agent is a vanger who once tried Nucleoboom without any snacks to go with it. The Beeboorats notice him immediately, give him a special label, and start assigning him the craziest tasks.

[Manual]
Everything that Boorawchick yells from his barrel, as the stern Buro, is written down, decorated with beautiful pictures, and proclaimed as compulsory. It's the smartest hoax in the Chain of Worlds, other than the popons and ProtoZeek.

[ZeePa]
ZeePa is the escave of the stupid zeepo. All of them, including their mommy Zeephra, are just crazy about the Softie. While I was trying to find out the reason for this disorder, I picked up a specimen of earth at the entrance to ZeePa, and you know what? It's got a high concentration of bog gasses!

[B-Zone]
If you take a careful look around, you'll realize you're B-Zone, you wandering dimwit. You can tell our escave by the smell of fresh toxick. It's the happiest place in the Chain of Worlds! By the way, the last of the Cryspo hid out here for quite a while, towards the end...

[Zeephra]
What do you see in that deranged nag? Has she been boasting of her Softie origin or trying to dress you up as ProtoZeek? Once, on a trip, Zeephra made a vanger so sick with her squeaking that he threw her out in the end.
She strayed into the bogs and came back completely crazy, scratching herself, giggling, and murmuring something about the Softie.

[Zeekatrix]
Zeekatrix, a vanger's best friend and a friend to anyone silly and carefree! In my escave, you can find a good piece of advice, ultimate truth, or the perfect toxick. Follow my advice and you'll be safe!

[toxick]
Well, in ZeePa, the anxious Zeephra has driven everyone mad with her tales about the Softie and such nonsense. The zeepo spend all day kneading clay and making popons, the poor things.
I want to help them with toxick, so I keep boiling it for them, putting my health at risk. I send the medicine to ZeePa for free. I just hope they don't get sick!
It was me who invented the recipe for toxick. It has so many ingredients that now and then I forget to put something into the mixture. But I can't make it without phlegma, that's for sure.

[popon]
ZeePa, the nuthouse in the bogs, provides us with oodles of the thingies. Zeephra thinks that the scribblings on the popons tell tales about ProtoZeek. That's a load of rubbish, but the things are actually quite useful. You can use them to pave roads or plug holes!

[ProtoZeek]
Arriving in ZeePa, a vanger is astonished to learn that ProtoZeek is none other than himself! Alas, that's the gist of Zeephra's madness. She believes herself to be Softie refuse, and that ProtoZeek is the idol of the ideal Softie. So as a boast they take the vanger, coat him with clay, and send him off to us. It's hilarious!

[Spring]
I love this merry cycle. Spring comes, and ProtoZeek is sure to follow soon. It's great fun watching the clay being removed from a vanger. The poor thing doesn't understand anything, just blinks and hiccups. Then all of B-Zone praises Zeephra for the treat and prepares a thanksgiving toxick for her.

[December]
Well, ask Zeephra about it. She's the one who calls everything here by words she imagines to be Softie words. She thinks them up, no doubt. But I don't care what they call the cycles as long as regular cirt deliveries continue.

[Saturday]
I once happened to be in ZeePa on Saturday. What a disgusting sight. Everyone is sitting still, mumbling praise to ProtoZeek. Zeephra, hopping around among them, punishes those lacking enthusiasm with a huge club. Remembering that picture makes me work twice as hard at boiling toxick. Zeephra is really sick in the head!

[Zeeklope]
This is the greatest nonsense on Necross! Just imagine a mob of vangers trying to snatch a lopsided statue of ProtoZeek away from each other. That idiot Zeephra can't give every vanger what they need. Zeeklope's so senseless it's hilarious!
I would like to organize something similar to take some All-Healing Toxick to ZeePa. The race will be called ToxickoZ. You'll become the first Toxickman, so start practicing in Zeeklope! My race will reach all of the worlds, and the vangers will flood into B-Zone in anticipation of ToxickoZ!

[Weexow]
I performed an experiment by releasing half a mechos of beebs there. For one reason or another, they grew up ugly. But they still remember their mommy Zeekatrix! Now whenever they see a mechos, they hope to find me inside. Whenever you're on Weexow, please give them my love.

[Boozeena]
It looks like Boozeena is the world where the vangers breed. I witnessed a funny scene there, oodles of vangers jostling around inside a circle of idiotic symbols. The wheelers were rubbing against each other as they drove on two wheels. The moment they noticed me, the whole crowd scattered in all directions.

[Threall]
A terrible world. Zeephra says some Infernals live there and drive the vangers mad, tricking them into getting themselves trapped, then eating them up. But I didn't see anybody. Only the crazy Zeephra can sit in the middle of the lava, and the Infernals are just another fruit of her fantasy, her way to fool the vangers.

[hMok]
hMok is the final refuge of the dead vangers. Their souls migrate to the gloomy world, and there they groan and moan. There, if you've run over too many innocent beebs, added mold to the cirt, or were rude to the counselors, you'll be tormented by the Chomper. Only decent vangers can escape hMok.

[Khox]
A vanger once begged me to accompany him on his voyage to hMok, but I'm no fool! I don't feel like feeding the dwellers of that place with my own flesh. If your mechos starts playing pranks, you're done for. They say that only the Softie who have gone wild are still on Khox, and if that's true, there's no place for me there! I'm a Cryspo!

[Ark-a-Noi]
Eh, I love taking rides around Ark-a-Noi on a jaunty vanger. You forget everything there, even Zeephra. I'm trying to persuade the local dwellers to move to Necross. It would just take strewing some popons over a couple of bogs to make a dry spot. Necross would become a happier place right away!

[Protractor]
The Departed Bios used to organize ritual races. The rules were very strange. A protractor is put into a vanger's cargo hold, and the vanger has to drive backwards to the finish, collecting beebs along the way. What a silly custom...

[Mechanical Messiah]
I think the Mechanical Messiah is a dried-up Softie left over from the time of the Clash. He must have fallen into the lava of Threall and gotten baked to a crisp. This whole thing just makes me sick. You can ask him to play some dirty trick on your fellow vangers, if you want.

[Function-83+]
This is a great gadget! The Spectators used Function-83+ to tunnel Passages and open new worlds, and the cunning Softie promised them that they would behave themselves in the new lands. But they were lying, of course, so the Spectators left the Softie behind, taking Function-83+ with them.

[Chomper]
Oh, Chomper is a very enigmatic creature. It hangs around on hMok, where it tortures bad vangers. Sometimes it gets onto other worlds, where it wreaks its mischievous havoc. It's probably a mythical creature that lives on its own. Don't you even think of bringing it here!

[Boot Sector]
Another enigmatic object. First you think that a vanger is in one mechos, then suddenly it's on a different world, in a new hearse! Once I was so frightened when they left me alone in an empty mechos. Vangers are such scoundrels I thought I'd never get back home!

[Flymatic]
Flymatic, sweetie, I made you with my very own hands, ages ago. Hmm, I can see by your face that you don't believe Zeekatrix. Don't I know Vangers! Worth about as much as a length of seaweed, an Eleepod's tail, and some sour toxick, the stuff I used to make Flymatic.

[The Spectators]
Those were pretty smart guys. They were able to build Passages to other worlds, but the tricky Softie cheated and exploited them. The Spectators fled to Xplo, though, shortly before the Clash, and wouldn't let anybody in. You can go to Spobs and see everything for yourself!

[Spobs]
Spobs is the refuge of the Spectators. The Softie set up a nuthouse there before, which is why it has such thick walls and odd customs. It looks like you have to carry three cans of toxick with you if you want to get in there. Spectators adore toxick, especially Parapheen.

[The Infernals]
The story of the Infernals was devised by Zeephra to fool the vangers. An unfortunate creature goes to Threall, takes a bath in the lava, and goes home beside himself with fear. And Zeephra is there like a shot, with her false sympathy and old tales. Personally, I don't think the Infernals exist at all!

[Parapheen]
Parapheen, my dear, is the main Spectator. I've talked to him through the escave window before. Since the Softie duped his kinsmen, he's been scared stiff and won't trust anybody. But he has a story to tell.

[Carmane]
It's the kind of sound lava produces when it gurgles. For some especially dumb brains, the phenomenon has bred belief in mysterious Infernals who rule the Chain of Worlds. And Zeephra uses this belief to her advantage...


-Spobs-

[quotha]
Parapheen + Vanger = Vanger + Parapheen...

[Empty Question]
Parapheen + Vanger = Vanger + Parapheen...

[Empty Molecule]
One divided by one is one. One times one is one. One plus one is one. One minus one is one. I am the only one...

[Block Molecule:B]
Access denied...

[Out Molecule:B]
Dividing you by zero, vanger. The result is unpredictable...

[Protractor is Absent]
You don't exist, I don't exist, it's all a bluff!

[Introduction]
I am Parapheen. The Protractor is on you. You've arrived, that is good. Find the Truth here, wanderer! 
I am the last Spector in the Lost Chain. Do you know about us? 
We remember everything; we're cognizant of the truth. Our world is a mystery. 
Everything here is under alien control. Zeroes all around. But the Spectors have penetrated into the core of the universe.

[Instruction to get Key2Threall]
Perhaps you are an accidental zero-wanderer. Perhaps you found the Protractor on the road, dropped by a plucky vanger. 
I need a reliable mobile unit! The Spectors are already non-existent in the normal sense. Among the zeroes we are infinite. 
To be more precise: I need an agent on Threall. I feel that the key to the secret of the UniVang must be there. 
However, Threall doesn't like vagabonds. The ENEMY dwells there. He's smart and cunning, and all zeroes die there instantly. I can't let my Protractor go there. 
I want to test you. Vanger and mechos makes up a single unit. There are too many of you here, making it difficult to distinguish you from each other. Almost all of you are zeroes even when added up. 
Prove that you want to be the first. Build a mechos that no one has ever seen and then come to me again.

[Key2Threall Accept]
I see you are a vanger with some smarts. You've proven you are unlike the others. Perhaps you aren't a zero, although that's only a lemma.
Now go and explore hostile Threall. The origin of both you and me is to be found there. It's an axiom. 
The Protractor will memorize everything and then pass it on to me. Make sure you do not lose it, and show it the whole of Threall. 
Be alert and don't believe your eyes. Watch your thoughts. 
If you return whole and intact, we will continue our conversation.

[Global Spectors Task]
So, you've come back, unit of the Chain's life. That's good. Now listen to my story of the meaning of life. 
You might believe in the tales you've heard about the ancient Softie and their clash with the Cryspo. That is only half the truth. 
I, Parapheen, the last Spector, have been waiting for you to avenge our deceased predecessors. 
You've been to Threall and sensed the presence of some alien forces. These are the Infernals, the cancer of our world. 
It's true that there was the Creature Soup. No one could live through it and preserve the vital energy of the Softie Spirits apart from us, the Spectors. 
The Infernals came to the Softie Spirits in the form of the Infinite Mind and conveyed to them devastating knowledge. They were simply manipulating the naive Softie. 
The most advanced of the Softie Spirits soon scented the treachery, but it was already too late to stop the wheel of history. 
So they isolated themselves from the outer world and set about learning the universe in order to comprehend the essence of being. That's how the Spectors appeared. 
The Infernals didn't miss the chance to take advantage of the Softie's foolishness and blazed a trail that led to the unsparing Cryspo. Thus, both forms of life were doomed.
It seems as if the Infernals thoroughly plotted the Clash and its consequences. We were only left to witness this catastrophe. We've delved into the history of bunches. 
By the time of the Clash, the Spectors, who were the Softie Spirits, had found a spiritual way of existing and, thus, managed to escape the universal fate. Then came the era of unreason. Since then we've been waiting and searching. 
We can only guess the overall objectives of the Infernals.
But the horror wasn't an accident. It was an experiment on two once glorious civilizations: the Softie and the Cryspo. 
Vangers are the only creatures who can change anything in the fading Chain. You can repay the Infernals for their treachery. 
Do you want to know who vangers really are? I can't tell you that right now, as it might ruin your destiny. Besides, I'm not sure I know the entire truth about you. 
The Infernals, who have never been seen, keep on steadily destroying the remnants of the UniVang's vital force. 
The Creature Soup left only very narrow-minded creatures alive who can just barely resist death. But you and they are all that remain from past glory and the aspirations of the Softie Spirits. 
The bios gather their might and lie, trying to look viable. It's the Creature Soup that taught them that. The rest just disappeared in the chaos. 
The silly bios are dreaming of breaking free from the pressures of the Larvae by having the latter captured and held in their escaves. It's all a sham! 
These miserable creatures can't live without a goal. You must have heard of the Departed Bios, yes? Some fools think that somewhere in the worlds, deep underground, there live the happy ones who were able to get hold of all their Larvae. 
It's a lie. Those dummies are just pathologically striving for their death without realizing it. It's self-destruction. 
But their demise is inevitable, for each new generation of vangers takes to capturing Larvae, and I can't stop it. The bunches are persistently digging a grave for themselves with the help of vangers. 
The only way to prevent the collapse of the bios is to reverse the process, in other words, to set them apart. The bunches want to go on living, but their nature is still against them. 
You must have already visited the small mystical worlds? I've got a plan to relocate the remaining bios there. This will extend the life of the Chain. 
The Chain and the bios are closely related. Have you ever noticed how the worlds change depending on the cycle of the bios inhabiting them? They may look lowly at first sight, but these underground creatures are not that simple. 
I couldn't explain this relationship for a long time. It's deeply rooted and at the moment you are unable to comprehend it. Still, you need to know that the UniVang is one in all its ways. 
Only vangers can perform the task of resettlement. But you are rare guests on Spobs, and you're the only one who has ventured to Threall. At last the ancient prophecies are coming true! 
If you wish to extend the existence of your world and give us some more time to find the way to salvation, then listen very carefully, as I shall say this only once. 
Only seven escaves have survived throughout the Lost Chain of Worlds. We are aware of four small worlds which may be suitable for the bios to live on. 
These worlds are Weexow, Khox, Boozeena and Ark-a-Noi. Although they are not particularly good for such weak creatures to inhabit, that is their only chance of breaking out from under the influence of the Larvae! 
The bios live underground, and if they adapt to the new worlds, they'll be temporarily free of the mercenary vangers who deliver that wretched cirt to them. 
No doubt, the trials will be hard and not many will survive, but my mathematical forecast says there is one chance out of a hundred for them to do so. 
The surviving bios will be relieved of the legacy of the Creature Soup: the Larvae. That means the collapse of the UniVang will be deferred. 
You must have already been employed in hauling passengers who appear in the escaves from time to time. These darers will be our hope and the pioneers of a new era. 
You must populate all four worlds that I mentioned. To do that, take at least one passenger from each escave, which is the minimum required to carry out Parapheen's plan. 
But mind, the bios won't trust a random vanger with their units. This attitude is optimal and rational, for Life is the basis of being. To earn the trust of the bios and take a passenger, you must fulfill some tabutasks, which are the missions of the bunches. Prove that you are a worthy servant of Life. 
After they've been set down on the surface, each passenger will start digging deep into the ground. Here your task is over, as no one will ever help them besides themselves and the laws of nature. 
You will not witness the flourishing of life, as that is a very long process. I'll keep an eye on the settlers. I can wait. 
When the new bios are composing legends about you, you'll already be far away. I'll guide you to a different world... 

[Add Protractor InfernalsKill Function]
Rejoice! The same vanger has arrived! 
The one whose existence I calculated long ago in the times of ProtoZeek! 
Your Protractor confirms that you've carried out my plan. The seeds have been sown, and now we only need to wait. Parapheen can wait. 
Now I'm convinced of your faithfulness, Unit of Life. Together we'll reach the ultimate end. 
At last I can share my innermost knowledge with you. 
The Spectors learned long ago that the world we live in is non-existent in some ways... 
I cannot give you a more precise explanation, as it's a feeling rather than a fact. It's something that even mathematics cannot do anything about. 
Each time we delve into the core of the world, we find errors there! 
These abnormalities are all around, but one can see them only when all illusions are gone, something we've managed to accomplish. 
Each of our attempts to change the course of things stumbled up against a counteraction. There was deliberate resistance. Some experiments were simply blocked by nature itself. 
So far, what we know for sure is that our world has been penetrated by some alien mind capable of changing any and all laws. We call these phenomena Infernals. 
You've visited Threall and seen something there, but the Protractor tells us you remember nothing of that. How sad. 
The seed of malice which has enfolded our world is to be sought in the Infernals. But we know practically nothing of them. 
As Spectors, we can only speculate on that. 
The most plausible hypothesis is based on several indirect conclusions based on the final actions of the Softie Spirits. 
We believe that the biological nature of the Softie and the insectoid Cryspo were so different that no genetic fusion was possible within that reality. 
The Creature Soup emerged due to other reasons. The Spectors failed to simulate the result in their labs. 
That means that the physical laws of our reality were transfigured. 
I cannot tell you all the details of my last hypothesis about the Infernals. 
To express it primitively, we assume there is some force in the universe that is even more powerful than the Infernals. 
We can try and let it know about our life and the horrors of this enclave world. 
That is all that can be done: only a one-way transfer of information. Nobody knows how They will interpret it, but perhaps the world will be rejuvenated. 
I've added a new feature to your Protractor, but you can use it only once. 
It transforms the Protractor into a transmitter sending signals to the unknown. That's how we contact those we call the I-I. 
That's an extremely simplified explanation of our invention. We worked on it for half an eternity. 
Now I see you are the one we can entrust this Super Task to. 
Take your modified Protractor and go to Threall, where you will leave the activated Protractor in the place you heard the strange voices coming from. 
It's the only point we've found that connects the dimensions. 
You will not be able to visit Spobs without the Protractor, but we may still be able to meet. 
Somewhere in the Chain there remains a unique object that belonged to the last of the Softie Spirits: Function-83+. It was their secret contrivance that the rest of the Softie didn't know about. 
With its help you can get to hMok, a sealed world with no Passages. 
That's all we know. This world is somehow linked with the way to the original Softie world. 
Thinking about the Chain's nature, the Spectors figure that our Chain is probably not the only one in the universe! 
The Earth is the hub of these spatial meta-structures. At times I've had a feeling that there are other Spectors somewhere. Find them! 
Farewell, Vanger!

[Unique Mechos Waiting]
Subject, your function is approaching zero. The absence of a unique mechos doubles the gamma-factor in your fall. You are in the epsilon neighborhood of the void. 
Giving the maximum admissible prompt. The required result is a unique mechos to be assembled with your help. Certain bios store non-functional parts. 
Theory: zero cannot become one. If you are a one, fulfill the order. If you are a zero, you do not exist.

[Threall Visit Waiting]
The intersection of the visitor and Threall results in a null set. Threall is not a null set. Conclusion: you are the null set. Your non-existence in this world prompts a crash of the Chain of Worlds. 
Outgoing message: all negative factors functioning in the Chain of Worlds are first and second derivatives of Threall influence. 
Information on the subject is required for life regeneration.

[Spectors Task Waiting]
Parapheen is in suspended mode. The dependence of biomass distribution on time must be continuous and increasing. Increase your body effort in a strictly non-linear manner. 
Mission description: Transfer at least one passenger from each escave to the four accessible and separate small worlds in order to inhabit them all. 
Distribution of life in the void of the Chain must be uniform and dense. That is the Parapheen's hypothesis on Bios Regeneration and Rescue.

[Threall Killing Waiting]
The Protractor's placement on Threall does not belong to the set of occurred events. Life threat is a non-decreasing function. The Infernals' influence is not limited in the current interval of the time scale. 
Mobilize your vital forces and perform the action required. Your body control algorithm must be linear. Leave the Protractor on Threall!


-Threall-

[Empty Molecule]
Communication terminated. The Mechanical Messiah controls the reality. 

[Messiah is Absent]
EREHW SI RUOY LACINAHCEM HAISSEM, TCEJBO???

[Introduction and Infernals Task]
Detected new Reason! The Mechanical Messiah is in touch with me. 
Hello, Mobile Reason. You are on Threall listening to Carmane. 
We want to save you and your world from destruction. 
We want to help you. We help all the Reasonable. 
A terrible catastrophe has befallen your world. The Reason is dying. We want to save your world. 
We are kind, rational beings from another world. We cannot come in person as we are different. 
We know what must be done to preserve the Reason of UniVang-3/8. You can save your world. 
We study dying worlds and cure them with the help of their own inhabitants. Each world is a treasure. 
We have studied your world, too. The situation is critical.
Those who live underground and don't move will die soon. It will be hard to save them, but you can do it. 
They have become dependent on unreasonable beasts that move underground. The Reasonable lose, as they are not eternal. 
They call their gods Larvae and dream of catching them. Their desires are correct, but hard to meet. 
The Unmoving are unable to capture their own Larvae. 
The longer they live with their disease, the worse their internal Destruction becomes. 
The Reasonable can get rid of the Larvae's evil only by getting hold of them. 
You are their only chance. 
Your task is to rid your world of Larvae. Then the Reasonable will be saved. 
You cannot kill Larvae; only their subjects can do that. 
But you can catch them and take them to the sufferers. 
By finding their Larvae, the Reasonable find themselves. 
After you have saved the Reason of your world, you'll have to save yourself. 
It must be eliminated, 
but only the one who clears the world of Larvae is able to do that. 
Be quick!

[Infernals Task Waiting]
The Mechanical Messiah is here. 
Carmane has spoken to you already, Mobile Reason. 
We can see into all worlds. 
Your world is dying. The Reasonable turn into inanimate objects. 
Larvae continue their run. Stop them. 
Kill all the underground unreasonable and deliver them to the Reasonable. 
After that you'll be able to take revenge for all the harm done to your world.

[Add Messiah SpectorsKill Function]
Carmane senses the Mechanical Messiah. Halt and listen, carrier. 
You've fulfilled the task! All Larvae have stopped their run and gone forever. 
The Reasonable have left along with them as was their will. 
They'll be happy there. They are saved. You've cleaned up and changed your world. 
We value each and every grain of Reason in the Universe. You've made the right choice. Now Carmane will tell you how to rid the world of the root of the madness. Every individual Reason goes through the Ordeal sooner or later. In the depth of Reason its tiny spark appears, striving to destroy the surrounding world. Ages ago it happened to your prototypes, who called themselves the Softie. The Crisis coincided with Insight, another stage in the evolution of the Reason. The best of the Softie, who called themselves Spirits, had developed their Reason to a new level. Some of the Spirits were unable to resist the temptation of the new knowledge being offered, but with their augmented power came the corruption of their Reason. They called themselves the Spectators, and they thought everything out very carefully. Their plan envisaged the elimination of all kinds of Reason in their world, and they nearly achieved their aim. They withdrew from society pleading their inclination toward contemplating existence and their passive attitude toward nature. In fact, they were acting. The Creature Soup had been planned and executed by them. They only had to wait until the Larvae finished off all Reason bit by bit. The Spectors cannot kill, as they changed their matter to survive the dark ages. But they can wait for a very long time, as they have defeated time. They have even managed to hide away from our eyes. Little is left to be done for their plan to be successfully fulfilled. But they failed to envisage one important factor: our interference. Thanks to you, Mobile Reason, the Larvae are exterminated and the Reasonable remaining from the Softie and the Cryspo are saved for the time being. But the Spectors are shrewd and they are sure to find a way to reach them.  That is why you must go on and stop at nothing to rid the world of them, otherwise your feat will be wasted. Mechanical Messiah, I see that your carrier is capable of that. I, Carmane, am teaching you a new skill. We do not want to exterminate anybody completely, not even such an evil manifestation of the Reason as the Spectors. We believe that it is a curable disease, but it takes time to cure it. We are going to talk to them more and more.  We seem to have found the way to completely block the Spectors from the outer world.  Mind you, this operation requires a sacrifice: the Mechanical Messiah will leave you forever to stay with them.  It will guard the Reasonable against the attempts of this disease. The blocked Spectors will be able to develop at ease. You must find the Spectors, activate the Mechanical Messiah, and place it in the very heart of their den. When the Messiah senses them, the Spectors will be shrouded in darkness. After that we won't be able to communicate with you without the help of our guide in your world, The Mechanical Messiah. But we do not want to abandon such a Mobile Reason as you: we can continue our collaboration in cleaning up other worlds. The only way for you to reach us lies through the home world of the Softie.  The key to the Passage leading to it is kept in the Chomper, the legacy of the ancient Spirits. The Chomper rests where you have never been yet. Do not fear dying with it. Set off on your long and uneasy journey. Your world is in your hands. We await you on Earth, Vanger!
Now Carmane will tell you how to rid the world of the root of the madness. 
Every individual Reason goes through the Ordeal sooner or later. 
In the depth of Reason its tiny spark appears, striving to destroy the surrounding world. 
Ages ago it happened to your prototypes, who called themselves the Softie. 
The Crisis coincided with Insight, another stage in the evolution of the Reason. 
The best of the Softie, who called themselves Spirits, had developed their Reason to a new level. 
Some of the Spirits were unable to resist the temptation of the new knowledge being offered, but with their augmented power came the corruption of their Reason. 
They called themselves the Spectators, and they thought everything out very carefully. 
Their plan envisaged the elimination of all kinds of Reason in their world, and they nearly achieved their aim. 
They withdrew from society pleading their inclination toward contemplating existence and their passive attitude toward nature. 
In fact, they were acting. The Creature Soup had been planned and executed by them. 
They only had to wait until the Larvae finished off all Reason bit by bit. 
The Spectors cannot kill, as they changed their matter to survive the dark ages. 
But they can wait for a very long time, as they have defeated time. They have even managed to hide away from our eyes. 
Little is left to be done for their plan to be successfully fulfilled. But they failed to envisage one important factor: our interference. 
Thanks to you, Mobile Reason, the Larvae are exterminated and the Reasonable remaining from the Softie and the Cryspo are saved for the time being. 
But the Spectors are shrewd and they are sure to find a way to reach them.  
That is why you must go on and stop at nothing to rid the world of them, otherwise your feat will be wasted. 
Mechanical Messiah, I see that your carrier is capable of that.
I, Carmane, am teaching you a new skill. 
We do not want to exterminate anybody completely, not even such an evil manifestation of the Reason as the Spectors. 
We believe that it is a curable disease, but it takes time to cure it. We are going to talk to them more and more.  
We seem to have found the way to completely block the Spectors from the outer world.  
Mind you, this operation requires a sacrifice: the Mechanical Messiah will leave you forever to stay with them.  
It will guard the Reasonable against the attempts of this disease. 
The blocked Spectors will be able to develop at ease. 
You must find the Spectors, activate the Mechanical Messiah, and place it in the very heart of their den. 
When the Messiah senses them, the Spectors will be shrouded in darkness. 
After that we won't be able to communicate with you without the help of our guide in your world, The Mechanical Messiah. 
But we do not want to abandon such a Mobile Reason as you: we can continue our collaboration in cleaning up other worlds. 
The only way for you to reach us lies through the home world of the Softie.  
The key to the Passage leading to it is kept in the Chomper, the legacy of the ancient Spirits. 
The Chomper rests where you have never been yet. Do not fear dying with it. 
Set off on your long and uneasy journey. Your world is in your hands. 
We await you on Earth, Vanger!

[Spobs Killing Waiting]
Carmane senses the Mechanical Messiah again. 
Mobile Reason, have you found the Spectors yet? 
We weren't mistaken about you, were we? 
The Mechanical Messiah is following you. Don't give us cause for worry. 
The Mechanical Messiah is prepared to share Eternity with the Spectors. 
Take it to them and leave it there activated. 
Then find Chomper. It will lead you to us. Reason will help Reason. 
Take the last step toward your future.

[Thunders!]
S. I. G. N. A. L. C. O. R. R. E. C. T. I. O. N. I. N. T. E. R. F. E. R. E. N. C. E...... 
M. E. C. H. A. N. I... S. S. I. A. H... F. A. U. L. T. P. R. O. C... T. E. D... 
S. I. M. U. L. A. T. I... U. N. I. V. E. R. S... H. A. L. T...!


-Poponkas-

[Poponka 0]
On how ProtoZeek overcame his reality... 
Once ProtoZeek was in the weeds contemplating himself
as he rocked on the surface
trying to become a water bubble.
As he did so, he wasn't sinking
and hadn't even gotten his wings wet.
A bunch of Zeeks was already rushing down the stream when,
at that pivotal moment, our ProtoZeek
couldn't stand it any longer and he blinked.
A teeny speck saved our ProtoZeek,
just like another trifling object
that had brought him into being long before.
That was the way ProtoZeek stayed with us
and not with those water bubbles,
which were so real and so obsessed with the running stream.

[Poponka 1]
Once ProtoZeek met Big Boo 
while on his complicated 
and edifying way. 
Big Boo was notorious for his brutality; 
he didn't know any limits 
and was unhappy about his permissiveness. 
ProtoZeek came up to this tyrant and offered 
to sting him painfully, but without any negative consequences for himself. 
Big Boo contemplated the offer for a while and finally agreed. 
Why not? 
He could do Everything. 
That was how ProtoZeek shafted Big Boo 
and got away with it. 
Big Boo died from the sting soon after...

[Poponka 2]
On how ProtoZeek found his sky... 
Once ProtoZeek was flying 
as only we Zeexen 
and maybe some scoundrel raffas can. 
None of those greedy Worms 
or those cracked Hornchiggers could fly 
like ProtoZeek was flying that day. 
Suddenly a gust of wind threw our hero forward 
and then turned him downside up. 
And there our ProtoZeek found himself face to face 
with the immense sky, 
unreachable from the narrow underground burrows. 
The sky surrounded ProtoZeek 
and began swallowing him until 
our poor ProtoZeek fell down on the stones, flat on his back. 
That was how ProtoZeek learned the malicious nature of the Sky 
and broke his left pinion.

[Poponka 3]
On what ProtoZeek would've done 
if he'd been born a fat-bellied bug... 
Once ProtoZeek thought that 
he was so lucky 
to be born among free Zeexen, 
and not among those ugly bugs 
that were silly and clumsy from birth. 
ProtoZeek imagined 
how he would have tried to crawl out 
of his stinky escave, 
while nastily rustling with his funny long antennae, 
and then crept up the nearest hill. 
He would have crept and crept, 
mechanically moving his monstrous legs 
and not noticing all the beautiful surroundings 
around his huge and useless body. 
Then he would finally have climbed to the top of the hill, 
and without even looking at the beautiful 
sight spread out to infinity, he would have tumbled around, 
heavily snuffling, and fallen down on sharp stones. 
At the last moment ProtoZeek suddenly remembered 
that he was not some thick-bellied bug, 
but a flying Zyk 
and took off at once. 
But had he been born a bug, 
he would have certainly crashed 
for his extreme stupidity...


-Tabutasks-

[Tabutask P1]
Some impudent thief filched two kusowocks from Leepky. 
Find him and settle his hash, so that others know not to do the same. 
Blow the thief's mechos up! 
Reward: 5000      Luck: 8    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask P2]
Two of Leepky's scratchers are putrid.
To cure them, ten fresh beebs are urgently needed.
Reward: 1300      Luck: 1     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask P3]
Leepky has learned that a famous thief is coming to Podish. 
The worm wants to hide all his kusowocks well. 
Just in case... 
Intercept the thief and prevent him from getting into the escave 
before the end of the cycle. 
Reward: 3000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask P4]
Stinkhorns have bred around Podish in large quantities. 
They are impairing communications with Incubator. 
Shoot at least 70 stinkers to improve communications. 
Reward: 1300      Luck: 2     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask P5]
Some time ago Leepky missed a kusowock. 
The counselor believes that the treasure may lie 
in one of the underground hideouts. 
To verify this, 
check five hideouts before the end of the cycle 
and see what's going on there. 
Reward: 1300      Luck: 2     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask P6]
Leepky wants to see if today's vangers can 
move carefully and stealthily. 
You have to reach Incubator before the end of the cycle 
without having shot a single stinkhorn! 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 4     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask P7]
The Eleepods have just set up a P-beam. 
They want to see if something has been lost in the world. 
The focus of the P-beam is temporarily set on your mechos. 
You have to fly from Podish to Incubator without landing, 
or else you'll ruin the tune-up! 
Reward: 4000      Luck: 4     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask P8]
Leepky is concerned about the recent 
influx of vangers from other worlds. 
The worm fears that the scoundrels might rip off all his kusowocks at any minute. 
You have to shoot up five vangers from Glorx or Necross properly 
to cool off the aliens' curiosity! 
Reward: 4000      Luck: 8     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask P9]
A bully recently descended on Leepky and was just spouting off about his authority. 
The scoundrel intimidated the counselor, 
not letting him say a word, 
and made him give up a CopteRig for half price. 
Leepky's fastidious nature doesn't bear such treatment. 
You have to whip the rebellious cads. 
Give any three flying vangers a good missile shower to teach the jackanapes how to behave. 
Reward: 3000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 2

[Tabutask P10]
Vangers are now reluctant to take part in the holy Eleection! 
They spend too much time 
on the ritual races of other worlds... 
You have to fire on at least four racers 
from Glorx or Necross 
so that they remember the honored Fostral! 
Reward: 4000      Luck: 8     Cycles: 3

[Tabutask P11]
Those damned Beeboorats grabbed lots of nymbos from the shippers! 
Due to that, we are short on eLeeches in Incubator! 
Bring 12 jars of nymbos there before the end of the current cycle. 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask P12]
Leepky is looking for a reliable vanger 
to ship phlegma to him. 
He is now busy writing a poem that is important for all the pod, 
and he needs 30 jars of phlegma 
to take a poet's bath and draw inspiration.  
Reward: 2000      Luck: 7    Cycles: 2

[Tabutask P13]
The beebs that have bred in large numbers have started 
to gnaw on the sleeping Eleepods! 
Leepky believes that Zeexen toxick 
is a good means of dealing with this plague. 
You must bring five jars of toxick to Podish on the double! 
Reward: 7000      Luck: 5    Cycles: 2

[Tabutask P14]
Two main pods bet on whether 
a raffa can win an Eleection. 
We're giving you the chance to settle the issue. 
Get into a raffa and win the ritual race! 
Reward: 7000      Luck: 10    Cycles: 5

[Tabutask P15]
Leepky is complaining that vangers are sluggish nowadays. 
They're too dangerous to be entrusted with the tender eLeeches! 
You have to show your bravery and endurance 
and ship two eLeeches in a single Eleection... 
Reward: 4000      Luck: 12    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask P16]
The vangers are rowdy at the moment. 
The eLeeches they bring are too often 
scared by the shooting and that whole nightmare on the road! The infants are shuddering... 
Show your skills and win the Eleection 
without using your weapons or even inserting them into the slots! 
Reward: 7000      Luck: 5    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask P17]
Leepky will be reading a lecture in Podish soon 
about the dullness and obtuseness of Beeboorats. 
He wants to use peeperettes as physical models. 
Bring him seven peeperettes! 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 4     Cycles: 3

[Tabutask P18]
The pod of Feenger and Leepky are having a grand occasion 
soon: the 5000th Plump-up. 
They deserve a great gift. ProtoZeek from Necross 
would be great, as Zeexen are good at making kusowocks! 
Reward: 15000     Luck: 12    Cycles: 5

[Tabutask P19]
The damn vangers have started forgetting the way to Podish. 
Due to this, the cycles last too long... 
This badly impairs the health of the pods! 
Show us what a tough vanger 
you are and do the honorable Eleepods a favor. 
If you manage to end our current cycle 
by bringing the appropriate cirt, 
the reward will be impressive! 
Reward: 10000     Luck: 10    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask P20]
Beeboorats have been annoying us a lot lately. 
They need to be taught a lesson! 
Let them know who rules the Chain! 
Drive their Larva away to one of the cursed worlds 
to make them howl from the grief in their escaves... 
Reward: 50000     Luck: 15    Cycles: 5

[Tabutask I1]
After an abundant Plump-up, 
a lot of phlegma has piled up in Incubator 
and there's no room left for nymbos. 
You must take at least 20 jars of the mucus to Podish. 
Reward: 3000      Luck: 5     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask I2]
Feenger came up with the idea that an eLeech 
brought to Podish by the winner on a raffa 
might become a gifted tragic poet, 
which we've been missing for a long time. 
You must take part in the Eleection on a raffa! 
Reward: 7000      Luck: 10    Cycles: 5

[Tabutask I3]
The pod of Feenger and Leepky are having 
a grand occasion soon: the 5000th Plump-up. 
They deserve a great gift. ProtoZeek from Necross 
would be great, 
since Zeexen are good at making kusowocks. 
Reward: 15000     Luck: 10    Cycles: 5

[Tabutask I4]
Beebs have dug a lot of holes around Incubator. 
This causes drafts in the escave, which is dangerous for eLeech health. 
You must exterminate as many beebs as possible, and not less than fifteen. 
Reward: 1800      Luck: 2     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask I5]
Fungi seriously hamper the Eleection racers 
as vangers are sluggish and clumsy nowadays. 
You must clear the approaches to Incubator 
by shooting 80 stinkhorns. 
Reward: 1300      Luck: 2     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask I6]
Buzzing insects annoy Feenger, keeping him from writing a poem 
in honor of the Eleepods. 
To help him finish the job in time, 
repel 13 swarms. 
Reward: 1400      Luck: 2     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask I7]
Leepky wants to see if today's vangers 
can move carefully and stealthily. 
You have to reach Podish 
without taking any damage to your armor 
and you must do it before the end of the cycle! 
Reward: 2500      Luck: 5     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask I8]
The Beeboorats' spy has stolen a tender eLeech 
and brought him to Glorx! 
It's scary to imagine what they did to him there... 
You must prosecute the scoundrel: kill him! 
Reward: 8000      Luck: 8     Cycles: 5

[Tabutask I9]
The Eleepods found out that a vanger 
got an infection in the swamps of Necross. 
He doesn't really care, but the eLeeches might get sick. 
We need time to prepare the phlegma potion, 
so you have to stop the plague carrier from 
getting into the escave before the end of the cycle. 
Reward: 3500      Luck: 7     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask I10]
Feenger is seeking a desperate vanger 
to carry out special missions. 
To prove your desperation, 
bombard five vangers from other worlds! 
Reward: 5000      Luck: 7     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask I11]
The impudent Beeboorats are trying 
to capture our eLeeches and take them to Glorx as food! 
We need someone to take the bandits in hand. 
Shoot five vangers from Glorx! 
Reward: 4500      Luck: 6     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask I12]
The saucy raffas get in the way of the racers, 
hamper the Eleection, 
and even dare to take on the vangers! 
Kill one raffa to teach the scabs 
to keep away from busy vangers! 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 3     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask I13]
A Beeboorat spy has been hanging around Incubator lately, 
probably looking for a place to dig a tunnel. 
Now he's heading for Glorx, 
but Beeboorats are dull and forget things easily. 
You have to keep him here until the end of the cycle 
so that the spy will have nothing to tell the Beeboorats about! 
Reward: 3000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask I14]
A bandit has been hanging around Incubator lately 
and bombarding passing vangers with missiles. 
This is clearly Beeboorat sabotage. 
Find two vangers with missile launchers and fire back 
so that the rest will stay in line and fear the Eleepods. 
Reward: 5000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask I15]
The crazy Zeexen have lured away the best vangers with their tales 
and promises of mind-boggling rewards. 
Bombard four vangers who took part in the ritual races on Necross. 
Let them think better of it and return to honorable Fostral! 
Reward: 8000      Luck: 10    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask I16]
Through an oversight of Feenger, 
who became engrossed in writing poems, some nymbos rotted away. 
You have to bring ten chunks of nymbos right away! 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask I17]
The less shaking and rattling an eLeech gets on his way from Incubator, 
the finer and tenderer his nature turns out to be. 
Feenger heard about a special flying mechos called Lawn Mower. 
Win an Eleection in it! 
Reward: 10000     Luck: 15    Cycles: 9

[Tabutask I18]
The counselor of Incubator is concerned 
about eLeeches being lost on the way to Podish... 
You have to come in third in the next Eleection 
and try to keep an eye on the first two racers... 
We hope to trace where the cult items disappear to. 
Reward: 12000     Luck: 5    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask I19]
Feenger has found Nucleobooms 
to be good plugs for the holes in Incubator. 
This way the mold doesn't gnaw away at the walls that much. 
Get him eight Nucleobooms! 
Reward: 3000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 3

[Tabutask I20]
Feenger has fallen into a deep inter-cycle depression. 
If his condition doesn't improve, 
he won't be able to organize the next Eleection! 
Only a choice kusowock can help him. 
Get ProtoZeek for Feenger right away! 
Reward: 20000     Luck: 15    Cycles: 1

[Tabutask V1]
Some impudent vanger 
brought some rotten popons from Necross. 
He managed to escape from Boorawchick somehow... 
Don't let the cad leave Glorx 
until our tough Agents arrive. 
Reward: 4000      Luck: 5     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask V2]
Glorx has lately become a hangout
for various gadders defying ruBeecation.
Exterminate three raffas to teach some respect for the Buro!
Reward: 4000      Luck: 8     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask V3]
As part of our scheduled campaign 
to exalt the glory of the Buro, 
you must fire at five vangers 
from Fostral or Necross before the end of the cycle. 
Reward: 6000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask V4]
Boorawchick wants to see how nimble the subordinates of the Buro are. 
Smash 15 beebs before the end of the cycle! 
Reward: 1800      Luck: 2     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask V5]
Boorawchick needs five glowing beebs 
to make parade medals 
for the upcoming Buro assembly. 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 3     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask V6]
Buzzing insects hamper the work 
of the scheduled sessions of the Buro. 
Repel ten swarms so 
that they stop interfering with the process of making important decisions. 
Reward: 1400      Luck: 3     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask V7]
One very impudent vanger has repeatedly lost his Rubbox. 
Despite all our warnings, 
he didn't reform and keeps ignoring the Manual. 
The Buro doesn't need such vangers. Destroy the useless gadder! 
Reward: 6000      Luck: 4     Cycles: 3

[Tabutask V8]
The Buro has learned that an Agent with 
a rebellious disposition has visited B-Zone. 
Wise Boorawchick smells a plot. 
You have to stop this vanger 
from entering an escave until the end of the cycle, 
when the Buro will have taken measures 
against a possible chemical assault... 
Reward: 6000      Luck: 5     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask V9]
Envoys of Necross at Zeekatrix's prompting 
are trying to pollute the Great Glorx with accursed toxick. 
You must put an end to this sabotage. 
Shoot up eight vangers from Necross! 
Reward: 6500      Luck: 4     Cycles: 2

[Tabutask V10]
The Buro's Slaves nearly blocked the last PeepShow, 
getting in the way of the Commissars, 
and the Buro got really upset about this. 
Kill one Glorx raffa 
so that the rest know their place! 
Reward: 500       Luck: 2     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask V11]
The Buro is concerned about 
the increased use of CopteRigs by vangers. 
At this rate they will all be flying instead of serving Beeboorats. 
Fire at six flying vangers 
to remind them of the roads of Glorx. 
Reward: 5000       Luck: 6     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask V12]
The Buro is interested 
in recruiting additional Slaves and Commissars. 
Glorx needs a better image, 
so bombard five participants of the ritual races 
on Fostral and Necross. 
Reward: 6000      Luck: 7     Cycles: 2

[Tabutask V13]
The Eleepods fear the Buro less and less. 
To inspire them with respect for us, 
kill any one of the participants of the ritual race on Fostral. 
Reward: 8000      Luck: 8    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask V14]
The Buro is concerned about 
the increasing cases of Slaves participating in the Nuclear War and PeepShow. 
This is a violation of the Manual! 
To investigate this phenomenon, the Buro is assigning you 
to win a Nuclear War on a raffa. 
Reward: 8000      Luck: 10    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask V15]
It has been reported by Agents 
that a celebration is being prepared in ZeePa. 
You need to ruin Zeephra's mood. 
Bring her an alien cirt and let her remember the Beeboorats! 
Reward: 8000      Luck: 8    Cycles: 2

[Tabutask V16]
Due to a global cold nip, 
the harvest of peeperettes has decreased in Ogorod. 
A triple shipment of seeds must be delivered there. 
Take 13 peeperettes there in the next PeepShow... 
Reward: 7000      Luck: 9    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask V17]
The damned Zeexen have developed toxick, 
a poison of great power, to kill Beeboorats. 
The Buro is planning a proper response for the poisoners, 
complete with a weapon of vengeance. 
Tankacid from hMok is one of its components. 
Secure it for us. 
Reward: 1000      Luck: 5    Cycles: 0

[Tabutask V18]
The extreme dullness of the Slaves, 
the laziness of the Commissars, 
and the disobedience of the Agents 
have wreaked havoc with Boorawchick's health. 
To restore his health, 
you must bring two fleshy eLeeches to VigBoo. 
Reward: 12000     Luck: 13    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask V19]
Boorawchick has been kind of stressed at work recently 
and gulped a double dose of cirt to relax. 
The Buro is upset about this. 
Help Boorawchick get over this by getting as much cirt as it takes 
to complete one of the nearest cycles! 
Reward: 12000     Luck: 10    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask V20]
The Zeexen have strengthened their influence in the Chain 
by luring many of our slaves away with their fairy tales. 
Take their Larva to one of the cursed worlds and leave it there. 
Let Necross quake in fear of Beeboorat anger. 
Reward: 50000     Luck: 15    Cycles: 5

[Tabutask L1]
Stylish Geer'ah has come up with a new competition for the Heroes. 
To organize it we need you to deliver 20 fresh beebs 
before the end of the cycle. 
Reward: 3000      Luck: 3     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask L2]
The Slaves have been sluggish lately. 
We don't know what they have been doing up there on the surface, 
so you have to fly 
from Lampasso to Ogorod 
without landing to check this out. 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 4     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask L3]
To reward the winners of the competition, for the glory of the Buro, 
and for the most stylish Geer'ah, we need you to bring 
one live and one dead eLeech. 
Reward: 10000     Luck: 12    Cycles: 5

[Tabutask L4]
Some scab recently brought a fake Valorin. 
It looks okay, but it's unfit for deeds of valor, 
so we can't use it in the stadium. Kill the jackasses 
who dared cheat Geer'ah. 
Reward: 4000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 3

[Tabutask L5]
Stylish Geer'ah has heard from Agents about some whirlpools 
on Glorx. You must check out this information 
and dive into a whirlpool. The enemies of Glorx may be hiding there. 
Reward: 1500       Luck: 1    Cycles: 0

[Tabutask L6]
Geer'ah has threatened to send a vanger to the stadium. 
However, the competitions in Lampasso are currently on a break, 
so stop that vanger from getting into Lampasso before the end of the cycle 
so that Geer'ah can prepare to meet 
the new competition participant. 
Reward: 6000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask L7]
To eliminate any obstacles 
to getting the Valorins delivered on time, Geer'ah is assigning you 
to bombard three vangers from Necross or Fostral 
so that they don't create traffic jams on the roads of Glorx. 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 3     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask L8]
The Buro has offered the Eleepods unconditional 
surrender, though because of their stupidity they have refused. 
You have to make them more amenable. 
Shoot up six vangers from Fostral. 
Reward: 4500      Luck: 4     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask L9]
Raffas have been repeatedly attacking 
our Valorin couriers lately. This is intolerable 
and we must take appropriate measures. Exterminate five raffas. 
Reward: 5000      Luck: 7     Cycles: 2

[Tabutask L10]
Judging from the latest reports, the time it takes Slaves 
to deliver Valorins has significantly increased during the last three cycles. 
To chastise these sluggards, shoot up eight raffas. 
Reward: 1500      Luck: 3     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask L11]
Geer'ah sent an Agent on a mission, 
but later had second thoughts about it. 
Keep the vanger on Glorx until the end of the cycle 
so that he doesn't mess up the whole plan. 
Reward: 5000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask L12]
Geer'ah recently sent a vanger on an inspection. 
However, the dolt has lost touch with headquarters. 
Bombard any two flying vangers 
and maybe the blockhead will regain his memory. 
Reward: 4000      Luck: 5     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask L13]
The Buro has decided to form a special troop of vangers 
to oppose saboteurs. 
The Commander who trains the troop is conditioning them to hide underwater 
so that they can ambush the enemy. 
You must stay underwater until the end of the cycle 
to prove your fitness, 
otherwise you risk adding your name to the list of saboteurs. 
Reward: 3000      Luck: 5     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask L14]
According to reports from our reliable Commissars, 
some of the others, having swallowed the bait of the Zeexen's slippery promises, 
started to participate in the ritual races of Necross. 
You must put an end to this outrage. 
Kill two racers on Necross. 
Reward: 15000     Luck: 13    Cycles: 4

[Tabutask L15]
For the ceremonial opening of the competitions 
and the smearing of the pedestal, Geer'ah needs 
some Eleepod phlegma. Bring 12 jars. 
Reward: 4000      Luck: 8     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask L16]
Geer'ah is concerned that 
the Nucleoboom has been delivered bruised lately. 
That's because those dull Commissars 
batter away at each other. Well, the wheelers can go hang, 
but Nucleobooms need careful handling. 
You are assigned to win the next Nuclear War 
with empty weapon slots. 
Reward: 7000      Luck: 8    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask L17]
To save funds, the Buro is planning 
to exchange the Commissar mechos for a raffa. To test this idea, 
the Buro is seeking a vanger 
who can win a Nuclear War against a raffa. 
Reward: 7000      Luck: 10    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask L18]
Our Agents on Fostral often can't collect cirt due 
to the hostility of local vangers. 
Deliver some alien cirt to Leepky in Podish 
to bring him around. 
Reward: 8000      Luck: 7    Cycles: 2

[Tabutask L19]
Many Heroes are waiting in the Geer'ah reserve, 
all eager to take part in the competition. 
However, the stock of Nucleobooms is not enough for all of them. 
Bring 13 Nucleobooms during the next Nuclear War. 
Reward: 5000      Luck: 9    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask L20]
The Buro wants to give the scabby Eleepods a surprise. 
Deliver 12 jars of toxick to Podish. 
Let Leepky go bald and forget 
how to write his insults about stylish Geer'ah. 
Reward: 8000      Luck: 8    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask O1]
Oboorez has found out that a commission from the Buro is going 
to stop by to check on the shrub beds. Unfortunately, the timing is all wrong: Oboorez has just started 
replanting. Delay the mechos with the commission and stop them from entering 
Ogorod before the end of the cycle so that the counselor can tidy up the garden. 
Reward: 6000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask O2]
The ever-present beebs have nibbled away some shrubs and Oboorez overlooked it 
because of his poor vision. To fulfill the plan, 
the counselor urgently needs 12 shrubs. 
Reward: 1000      Luck: 5     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask O3]
Some rat has blown the whistle on Oboorez for hiding fake 
peeperettes and the Buro has given the counselor an admonition. Oboorez 
is asking you to kill the rat 
for this betrayal. 
Reward: 3000      Luck: 7     Cycles: 3

[Tabutask O4]
The lazy Slaves amuse themselves by treading down beebs near escaves 
instead of shipping Valorins and shrubs. This is not what 
the Buro raised them for. You are to squash ten beebs 
so that none remain for those slugs and for the Slaves to remember their job. 
Reward: 1000      Luck: 1     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask O5]
Big swarms of insects are stopping our Jablees from flying out of Ogorod. This 
could hamper Beeboorat rituals, 
so you must repel eight swarms before the end of the cycle. 
Reward: 1500      Luck: 3     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask O6]
Some dolts have robbed an old hideout and armed themselves 
with missile launchers. The blockheads can't handle them properly 
and fire at every passer-by. Give the scoundrels what for, 
bombarding the five mechos that have missile launchers. 
Reward: 2500      Luck: 5     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask O7]
The Commissars say that clumsy freaks from 
Fostral smashed many peeperettes 
in the last PeepShow. Glorx is no place for those worms. Fire at five 
vangers from Fostral to help them forget the way here. 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 3     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask O8]
Fatso, the chief inspector and Oboorez's best friend, 
got bogged down in Ogorod, where the inspector's mechos rusted. 
Bring four CopteRigs into Ogorod 
right away to see the guest off, 
since the stock of cirt is running out. 
Reward: 3000      Luck: 6    Cycles: 1

[Tabutask O9]
Shipping peeperettes is a delicate task. The main thing is to avoid bruising 
or spilling them. For research, Oboorez is assigning you to reach 
Lampasso without taking any damage. 
Reward: 1000      Luck: 5     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask O10]
Oboorez has some suspicions about the source of fake peeperettes: 
the Eleepods plant them in various hidden places 
to corrupt our Commissars. Check out four underwater hideouts 
before the end of the cycle. 
Reward: 500       Luck: 2     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask O11]
A Zeexen spy has filched a peeperette from Oboorez to 
take it to B-Zone for analysis. Beeboorats 
don't give up their secrets so easily; hold the thief on Glorx 
until the end of the cycle, at which point the peeperette will rot away. 
Reward: 5000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask O12]
A long time ago peeperettes were shipped on special mechos 
called Queen Frogs. What an enjoyment it was to watch them go. 
Oboorez wants to relive the old days and is asking you 
to win a PeepShow on Queen Frog. 
Reward: 10000     Luck: 15    Cycles: 9

[Tabutask O13]
Oboorez has decided to celebrate the 1000th cycle of his service in Ogorod. 
He knows the recipe for a delicious dish, for which you must bring 
one nymbos, two jars of phlegma, and one dead eLeech. 
Reward: 500       Luck: 5     Cycles: 3

[Tabutask O14]
Some Eleepod vangers dare to take part in 
PeepShow. The peeperettes they bring are all dirty 
and don't sprout well. Kill one vanger 
from Fostral who is taking part in a PeepShow to keep those worms away from Glorx. 
Reward: 5000      Luck: 10   Cycles: 4

[Tabutask O15]
Oboorez is complaining that the bosses from the Buro take 
all the best from the vangers' catch and leave 
nothing for Ogorod. To cater to old Oboorez, bring him an eLeech. 
Reward: 1000      Luck: 8     Cycles: 3

[Tabutask O16]
To save funds, the Buro is planning to change 
the Commissars' mechos to raffa. To test this idea, the Buro 
is seeking a vanger who can win a PeepShow on a raffa. 
Reward: 7000      Luck: 11    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask O17]
Oboorez once knew tough vangers 
who could easily dive into a whirlpool and pull out various 
objects. Show your talent and dive into a whirlpool 
to convince Oboorez that the Buro is still going strong. 
Reward: 500       Luck: 1     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask O18]
Because of a leaky roof in Ogorod, 
the emergency supply of peeperettes has rotted away. It was there 
in case of a siege by the Buro's enemies. Bring ten peeperettes 
from the next PeepShow to make up for the loss. 
Reward: 3000      Luck: 8   Cycles: 3

[Tabutask O19]
For peeperettes to sprout lushly, the shrubs must 
be softened properly, and phlegma is best for that. 
Bring eight jars of phlegma before the end of the cycle. 
Reward: 1000      Luck: 6     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask O20]
Oboorez has sent dozens of requests to increase 
his cirt allowance because of his service time. However, the dang burocrats 
don't give a rotten beeb about the old chap. Bring Boorawchick to Ogorod, where Oboorez 
will talk to him about life. 
Reward: 1000      Luck: 12    Cycles: 1

[Tabutask Z1]
Zeephra has suspicions that Zeekatrix is growing flies and sending 
them here to distract ZeePa dwellers from righteous thoughts. 
Repel eight swarms just in case. 
Reward: 500       Luck: 3   Cycles: 0

[Tabutask Z2]
Zeephra has started writing a new series of stories 
about ProtoZeek under the title 'Zeek and Beebs.' 
The new stories are likely to make B-Zoners repent of their wrongdoing. 
Bring 25 fresh beebs for inspiration. 
Reward: 800       Luck: 4     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask Z3]
Zeephra wants to grow jablees from Glorx 
to adapt them for scattering popons over B-Zone. 
The effect of the propaganda will jump a hundredfold. 
Bring eight peeperettes right away. 
Reward: 1000      Luck: 8   Cycles: 3

[Tabutask Z4]
Zeephra has heard many times about the cruelty of vangers. 
However, she doesn't believe these tales: 
vangers are nice and funny, aren't they? 
To deflate these rumors, you must go from ZeePa to B-Zone 
without taking any damage. 
Reward: 1000      Luck: 7     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask Z5]
Zeephra has been waiting for the real Softie for a long time. 
She believes that they will come and bless her. 
You must fly from ZeePa to B-Zone without landing 
and see if any Softie have come to Necross yet. 
Reward: 1500      Luck: 4     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask Z6]
One gross beeboorattish mug 
has offended Zeephra. 
He also said there never were and will never be any Softie. 
This hurt the innermost feelings of the counselor. 
Kill the offender. 
Reward: 4000      Luck: 8     Cycles: 3

[Tabutask Z7]
Your playful Zeephra once decided to play a trick 
on an obtuse vanger 
and sent him to find a Departed Bios in the hideouts of Fostral. 
He is on his way back now, all upset. Delay the blockhead 
and stop him from breaking in here while Zeephra 
comes up with another story to justify herself. 
Reward: 3000      Luck: 8     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask Z8]
Zeephra is carrying out research on vanger psychology, 
studying their reaction to external irritants. 
Bombard any seven vangers 
and describe their response. 
Reward: 2500      Luck: 8     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask Z9]
Zeephra has heard from vangers that some weird sounds 
have been coming from the Necross bogs lately. 
The counselor has suspicions that there are some Softie sitting in the bogs 
waiting for a chance to come out. 
You are assigned to peek into two bogs and see what's going on in there. 
Reward: 500       Luck: 2    Cycles: 0

[Tabutask Z10]
The vile Zeekatrix likes to spread her toxick 
around the worlds hoping that they'll inhale this gunk 
and get sick. Only recently she sent out a courier. 
Delay him on Necross 
so that his cargo goes a bit sour and loses its toxicity. 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 8     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask Z11]
Zeephra has wings, though she can't fly, 
while some vangers do it easily, 
something that hurts the counselor deeply. 
Fire at three flying vangers 
to calm Zeephra down a little. 
Reward: 1500      Luck: 7     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask Z12]
The vangers have forgotten good Zeephra completely 
and haven't visited her for a long time. 
B-Zone is drowning in apostasy 
as there's no one to take ProtoZeek to them. 
Bombard five vangers participating in the ritual races 
on Fostral or Glorx to distract them from the vanities of the world. 
Reward: 3000      Luck: 9    Cycles: 2

[Tabutask Z13]
To harden popons, the messages of ProtoZeek 
to the apostates in B-Zone, Zeephra has developed a new recipe. 
One of its components is toxick. Bring ten bottles before the end of the cycle. 
Reward: 600       Luck: 6     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask Z14]
Zeephra wants to know how much toxick is left in Zeekatrix's store. 
Bring 20 bottles of the potion from Zeekatrix here 
and maybe her treasure will run out. 
Reward: 1000      Luck: 9   Cycles: 1

[Tabutask Z15]
Zeephra has heard that Leepky has a statuette. 
It's surprising that the worms could create anything of value. 
Bring Leepuringa here so Zeephra can take a look at this marvel. 
Maybe we'll send it to B-Zone. 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 13   Cycles: 5

[Tabutask Z16]
You are aware that we send ProtoZeek to B-Zone 
to convert unbelievers and reassure doubters. 
To convince them of our peaceful intentions, win a Zeeklope 
with empty weapon slots. 
Reward: 6000      Luck: 8   Cycles: 6

[Tabutask Z17]
Zeephra wants to get hold of a live Eleepod. 
They are good at writing poems 
and their talent can be used to convince the B-Zone dwellers 
of the righteousness of our faith. 
Zeephra intends to raise a little Eleepod herself, 
so you have to bring her an eLeech. 
Reward: 5000      Luck: 12   Cycles: 5

[Tabutask Z18]
Zeephra thinks that a live Beeboorat 
is the best object to test popons on. 
If this dumb creature shows even a slight reaction 
to the story about ProtoZeek, one can be sure 
that everyone in B-Zone will drown in tears. 
For that reason you are assigned to secure a Beeboorat for Zeephra. She'll find a use for him. 
Reward: 8000      Luck: 10    Cycles: 1

[Tabutask Z19]
Zeephra has been waiting a long time for a vanger who could deliver Zeexen 
from the oppression of Larvae and cirt. His appearance would make B-Zone settlers quiver 
and join the cause of ZeePa. 
Bring enough cirt 
to complete the next cycle 
and Zeephra will broadcast the joyful news across all the worlds. 
Reward: 6000      Luck: 12    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask Z20]
There's gossip afoot that the greedy Beeboorats got themselves two Larvae. 
Another one and it will be a disaster: the Chain of Worlds will break 
and the escaves will drown in bogs. To prevent this, 
take a Beeboorat Larva to one of the cursed worlds and leave it there. 
Reward: 30000     Luck: 15 Cycles: 5

[Tabutask B1]
Zeekatrix has decided to cook toxick using a new recipe. 
The potion should be strong and heady 
so that everyone in ZeePa collapses paws up. 
One of the ingredients of the new toxick is fresh beebs, 
so bring 20 of them right away. 
Reward: 900       Luck: 3     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask B2]
Glorious vangers complain 
about stink horns breeding in large quantities around B-Zone and hampering free movement. 
If vangers stop visiting Zeekatrix, 
who will ship toxick? 
Shoot 20 stinkhorns before the end of the cycle 
to calm the counselor down. 
Reward: 1300      Luck: 5     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask B3]
Zeephra, the pain in the neck, has sent a vanger with popons to other worlds. 
Zeekatrix wants to play a trick on her and keep the courier on Necross 
until the end of the cycle. Then the popons will molder 
and Zeephra will have to write new ones. 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 8     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask B4]
Zeekatrix wants to grow flashing beebs in her escave. 
Having chewed over this idea, she's decided what components 
will bring about a successful result. 
Get her two nymbos and a jar of phlegma. 
Reward: 600       Luck: 2     Cycles: 3

[Tabutask B5]
Zeekatrix has decided to carry out an experiment to find out 
what happens if stinkhorns are allowed to grow for ten cycles in a row, 
and especially whether they'll be able to shoot a mechos. Go to ZeePa from here 
without shooting stinkhorns so as not to mess up the experiment. 
Reward: 400       Luck: 4     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask B6]
Zeekatrix is very curious about the various weapon 
and device recharging stations left by the Softie. 
They are old and play pranks. 
Take a closer look at them by charging 
and discharging your energy shield three times 
at one of the broken recharging stations. 
Reward: 200       Luck: 8    Cycles: 1

[Tabutask B7]
Some lazy raffas refuse to ship toxick no matter 
how much Zeekatrix asks them to, 
saying that toxick gnaws their feeble crates. 
Kill one raffa to gain respect for the counselors from those scabs. 
Reward: 1000      Luck: 5     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask B8]
Zeekatrix sent a vanger on an expedition 
to the cursed worlds. Surprisingly, he survived 
and is now coming back for his due reward, 
but the poor counselor doesn't currently have enough beebs. 
Stop the vanger from entering the escave before the end of the cycle, 
and Zeekatrix will try to scrape together the needed amount. 
Reward: 3000      Luck: 8    Cycles: 0

[Tabutask B9]
Zeekatrix hates the wheelers from Fostral. 
They are quite bombastic and aren't easily persuaded of the truth 
of the counselor's stories. In addition, they criticize 
Zeekatrix's literary talent. 
Bombard five vangers from Fostral before the end of the cycle 
to take the jackasses down a notch. 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 10   Cycles: 0

[Tabutask B10]
Zeekatrix is curious as to how raffas survive 
and even manage to ship some wares. 
Perhaps it's because of the toughness of the mechos. 
Shoot up five raffas and watch them jump and fly around. 
Reward: 1500      Luck: 3     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask B11]
Zeekatrix considers all the ritual races superstitious 
and atavistic, because the Softie 
didn't have any. 
Help and knowledge must be brought to the miserable creatures drowning in their fallacy. 
Bombard two vangers taking part in the ritual races 
on Fostral or Glorx. 
Reward: 1000      Luck: 8     Cycles: 0

[Tabutask B12]
Zeekatrix has decided to pave the approaches to B-Zone with popons. 
This way the mechos' wheel suspension will not suffer from the bumps, 
and vangers will visit Zeekatrix more often. 
Bring 30 popons for Zeekatrix. 
Reward: 400       Luck: 10    Cycles: 3

[Tabutask B13]
Zeekatrix wants to prepare the most poisonous toxick ever 
so that Zeephra kicks the bucket the moment it's brought to ZeePa. 
Bring six bottles of phlegma for it. 
Reward: 1000      Luck: 5     Cycles: 1

[Tabutask B14]
Zeekatrix is surprised at Zeephra's ability to cheat 
vangers and make them carry ProtoZeek around. 
Fire at four Zeeklope participants 
to open their eyes. 
Reward: 500       Luck: 5     Cycles: 3

[Tabutask B15]
Zeekatrix wants to find out how raffas compare 
to vangers with real mechos. 
To help with the research, 
deliver ProtoZeek in a raffa. 
Reward: 5000      Luck: 13    Cycles: 6

[Tabutask B16]
Zeekatrix is checking a supposition that Beeboorats originate 
from ooze and seaweed. To carry out the research she needs four shrubs and four Valorins. 
Bring them to Zeekatrix right away. 
Reward: 500       Luck: 7    Cycles: 1

[Tabutask B17]
Zeekatrix has heard about some huge and dreadful Softie mechos 
that used to horrify every living thing in the Chain. 
The counselor wants to assemble such a mechos for herself and come out into the world. 
Bring any one part of the mechos 
called Last Moggy. 
Reward: 5000      Luck: 14    Cycles: 6

[Tabutask B18]
Zeekatrix wants to cook special Beeboorat toxick using a proprietary recipe. 
As the bugs are crazy about their Nucleobooms, 
bring ten of them here right away. 
The new potion should be appreciated on Glorx. 
Reward: 2000      Luck: 10    Cycles: 2

[Tabutask B19]
Zeekatrix has heard that some 
funny underground animals live on nearby Ark-a-Noi. They are very timid 
and hide from big and heavy mechos. 
You have to go to this world on a raffa 
and observe the manners of those beasts. 
Reward: 500       Luck: 12    Cycles: 6

[Tabutask B20]
Zeekatrix has decided she'll start making popons and send them to ZeePa herself. 
Otherwise they'll think that only duffers live in B-Zone. 
The counselor believes that a fat dweller of Fostral 
would be just perfect for this job. Bring an Eleepod to Zeekatrix quickly 
and she'll knock the socks off those backward guys in ZeePa. 
Reward: 5000      Luck: 15    Cycles: 1


-Passengers-

[Passenger P->I]
I am an Eleepod on my way from Podish to far-away Incubator. 
Lend your ears, brave wheeler, to the law of driving Eleepods. 
If you see another vanger, hide away in a trench, deep under cover! 
There you will wait until the danger to my precious, playful life is gone...

[Passenger I->P]
I am an Eleepod, mind you. I'm on my way from Incubator to Podish. 
Take it slow, just a bit faster than a beeb, and stop gazing around. 
Do not flap my scratchers during the long journey. 
One can't regain inspiration lost on Fostral paths.

[Passenger V->L]
I am a Beeboorat on my way from point VigBoo to point Lampasso! 
Here are your instructions. Keep strictly to the middle of the road! 
Do not crush the beebs without the proper command. 
Two strikes on the head will serve as the signal to attack.

[Passenger V->O]
I am a Beeboorat on my way from point VigBoo to point Ogorod! 
Here are your instructions. Keep strictly to the middle of the road! 
Do not crush the beebs without the proper command. 
Two strikes on the head will serve as the signal to attack.

[Passenger L->V]
I am a Hero Beeboorat on my way from Lampasso to VigBoo! 
Learn courage from the Beeboorats and bone up on the Hymn of the Brave: 
Ooo-aaa! Take a Nucleoboom in your left paw! 
Aaa-ooo! Take your head in your right paw! 
Watch the Jablees flying high! 
Listen to whirlpools gurgle! 
Yeee! Quell the sapless-bellied enemy!

[Passenger L->O]
I am a Hero Beeboorat on my way from Lampasso to Ogorod! 
Learn courage from the Beeboorats and bone up on the Hymn of the Brave: 
Ooo-aaa! Take a Nucleoboom in your left paw! 
Aaa-ooo! Take your head in your right paw! 
Watch the Jablees flying high! 
Listen to whirlpools gurgle! 
Yeee! Quell the sapless-bellied enemy!

[Passenger O->V]
You, pile of iron, will take the Beeboorat from Ogorod to VigBoo! 
How long has it been since you scrubbed your mechos? You're driving a delegation, not a shrub! 
Can you manage the controls? Didn't miss a single rut, I see, did you? 
Well, well, I'll give you a hand, don't bother me.

[Passenger O->L]
You, pile of iron, will deliver the Beeboorat from Ogorod to Lampasso! 
How long has it been since you scrubbed your mechos? You're driving a delegation, not a shrub! 
Can you manage the controls? Didn't miss a single rut, I see, did you? 
Well, well, I'll give you a hand, don't bother me.

[Passenger Z->B]
Hey, lover boy, give the cheerful Zeex a ride from ZeePa to B-Zone, will you? 
Zeephra wants to preach a sermon and give out popons 
to commemorate ProtoZeek's relocation from Glorx to Necross. 
They are expecting me in B-Zone...

[Passenger Z->V]
Hey, lover boy, take the cheerful Zeex from ZeePa to VigBoo. 
Do you know the way? You know, the Beeboorats elected me counselor. 
They said I could choose any escave on Glorx. 
If you make me like you, I will appoint you my aid.

[Passenger Z->L]
Hey, lover boy, give the cheerful Zeex a ride from ZeePa to Lampasso, will you? 
ProtoZeek liked strolling to Lampasso. 
Once while fighting back wild beebs on his way, 
he dropped his staff. Keep your eyes peeled, 
maybe you'll spot it. We'll split the reward fifty-fifty.

[Passenger Z->O]
Hey, lover boy, take the cheerful Zeex from ZeePa to Ogorod, will you? 
Oboorez wrote that the shrubs are possessed with an evil peeperette spirit. 
I am going there to exorcise it in the name of ProtoZeek by reading popons. 
Drive carefully, my good vanger...

[Passenger Z->P]
Hey, lover boy, give the cheerful Zeex a ride from ZeePa to Podish. 
They say that Leepky dug out something like a popon. 
It is a square object, one side dark, 
the other white and glaring 
with mysterious inscriptions.

[Passenger Z->I]
Hey, lover boy, give the cheerful Zeex a ride from ZeePa to Incubator. 
I will let you in on a secret: Zeephra sent me for an eLeech. 
Do you think Feenger will agree to exchange it 
for ten select popons and a beebbox made of a dried shrub?

[Passenger B->Z]
Give the Zeex a ride from B-Zone to ZeePa, will you? I am a good companion. 
Zeekatrix wants to cook toxick for personal orders, 
so I will conduct a survey of all Zeexen, learn their tastes, 
and write down their requests and wishes. This is the new concept of customer service.

[Passenger B->V]
Give Zeex a ride from B-Zone to VigBoo, will you? I am a good companion. 
As you know, the Beeboorats decided to make Glorx a swamp, 
which will make catching vangers easier for them: one cannot escape from a trembling bog! 
Boorawchick needs a work plan and consultations. That is why I am going there...

[Passenger B->L]
Give the Zeex a ride from B-Zone to Lampasso, will you? I am a good companion. 
Geer'ah has invented a competition in which captured vangers take part. 
He is sending out invitations to a new supertournament, 
and those who bring a vanger with them can enter for free. 
You are my ticket, lover boy.

[Passenger B->O]
Give the Zeex a ride from B-Zone to Ogorod, will you? I am a good companion. 
Oboorez wants to grow Softies out of the shrubs. What a brilliant idea! 
Zeekatrix is watching the experiment closely and supplying chemicals. 
She put forward a hypothesis that if an Eleepod tail is sewed onto a shrub, 
the possibility of getting a Softie in the end is higher!

[Passenger B->P]
Won't you give the Zeex a ride from B-Zone to Podish? I am a good companion 
and there are rumors that 
either an Eleepod or a worm resembling a Larva hatched out of some nymbos 
that was lying by a tank of cirt. The Eleepods are hiding this prodigy of nature, 
but I want to rustle around in their escaves and find out the whole truth...

[Passenger B->I]
Give the Zeex a ride from B-Zone to Incubator, will you? I am a good companion. 
Haven't you heard the news? The Eleepods have turned into a Departed Bios! 
Their escaves are empty, and I am in a hurry to settle there 
before the Beeboorats with their odds and ends have taken over. 
For a vanger there are some easy pickings: 
Incubator has piles of stuff all over the place. So let's roll, wheeler!


-Endings-

[Final 1]
To the Buro. Protocol of the competition (copy). 
Geer'ah (Stylish), the chief referee, Lampasso, 10192th Progress from the flooding of Glorx. 
Arrived at the stadium:- 
35 units of Valorin, of which two qualified as shrubs (The Certificate of Unserviceability and Referral to Ogorod is attached)- 
vanger (1 unit), condition: satisfactory, reflexes: normal, response to light: good- 
15 tech support beebs- 
a dried Zeex (1 unit) for improving Heroism.
 
Nucleobooms delivered in time. 
Utilization of the vanger carried out according to 'All vangers go to the stadium for achievements!' by Geer'ah. 
The subject voluntarily took part in 'Mechos in Nuclear War' ('General Register of Sports' by M. Geer'ah, NN 602). 
According to the protocol, the vanger and other competitors were put into iron barrels symbolizing mechos. Another team of competitors stuffed the barrels with hardened Nucleobooms, trying to jam in as many of them as possible. 
As planned, the vanger's 'mechos' accommodated the maximum number of Nucleobooms and he was solemnly proclaimed the winner. Geer'ah put a wreath of seaweed on top of his remains.
 
Compendium: Vanger's participation in the competition has boosted ratings by 44%. Faith in the Buro has risen by 12%, conviction in Beeboorat ultimate victory by 1%. 
Registered signs of spectator elation: 22 cases of falling off the stands, 45 cases of tearing off one's own limbs, 2677 screams of excitement.


[Final 2]
SHIFT 83.12.99 00:01:83
Section N13 - Line 17 - Stand EE-7855/3420.bis. 
Task U/VNG-3/8. Object 442.090. Serial KD/CHSKRN+. 
System message. Event: code X-01. 
Abnormal termination. Category 'Lucky Fluke.'
 
Data from master console: zero level for output signals, feedback circuit blocked, Z-trigger in auto-resonance mode, buffer modules cleared. 
Data from scanning V-matrices: the object has contacted the MM-unit and failed to operate.
 
Data from logic analyzer: a defect was found in the object, a fatal tendency to finish the testing phase prematurely with a positive result. 
Data from garbage collector: resources from the object after self-destruct have been freed and re-used.
 
Error codes: 000, 001, 002, 003, 004, 023, 08338, 0293939.


[Final 3]
External Thoughts Received En Route to Earth... 
Vanger. The Penetrated Spectators are speaking to you. You have already decomposed into Passage particles, but have not yet left the Chain. You are practically on Earth, and there is no way back. We finally have a moment to explain to you who you are and who we are, as you have reached the point when we are obliged to explain everything and we will not have another chance. The first circle has been passed. Ahead lies what is unknown even to us...
  
The Spectators are the hidden consciousness of this world. We have managed to free ourselves from the control of physical laws and have overcome even the constraints of time. The Spectators have reached the ultimate fundamentals of the Universe, but we had to transform into another possible form of being to achieve this. Our reality is regularly subjected to cleansing, which destroys any phenomena outside the laws of this world. Once, an error or fluctuation occurred which led to our appearance. We managed to penetrate the situation just in time, before the next purge, and changed our nature by using someone's reserved layers of reality. Since then we have been able to quietly observe the world as it develops, able to return endlessly to what we have already seen, though the longer we did this, the more artificial the world seemed to become. We owe our existence to an external will.
 
The birth of the Spectators coincided with the outward expansion of the future Softie: the human civilization. What happened after that is well known to you. The incomprehensible Creature Soup was to bring an end to this enclave world, but in the scenario of our reality vangers suddenly appeared on the surface of the worlds. The rise of these mechanisms was not logical. To us the vangers became the ultimate riddle of the Chain, and we watched them closely, trying to comprehend the essence of their existence and the nature of this phenomenon...
 
Our form of existence eliminates direct interaction with physical reality: we can only exchange information. All our attempts to establish contact with the vangers were in vain, and soon it become clear that we were dealing with a mechanical form of will, an exception to the evolution. The Chain was turning into a uniform metastructure. The supervangers became our next discovery: rare forms of this creature characterized by an extremely high level of personal progress in exploring the world and a conspicuous freedom of behavior. Sometimes independent contact with them was possible, but we were never able to interpret their conduct and calculate a system of prediction.
 
The vangers have no material substance. We did an immense amount of work communicating lucidly with the natives of the Chain. They informed us that in a certain instant the mechos comes to life and begins to act intelligently. All attempts to penetrate inside the mechos were fruitless, as there is nothing in there that could possibly be an intelligent creature. The vangers control the mechos from without and can move between them, but no sign of a physical presence of vangers outside the mechos has been detected. They are one entity in some respects, but the nucleus of the supervangers seems to lie beyond the boundaries of this reality.
 
However, the Spectors managed to find a way to implant their own forms of autonomous wills into the mechos, and at that point we had the chance to launch our own vangers. This process was initiated at the lowermost stratum of the Universe, as the vangers are not a normal part of this reality. So, we started our experiments. Our artificially created vangers have proved practically inviable in the UniVang, though our experiments are still in progress. Later, however, another way was found: we discovered highly powerful, adaptive sources of will in the past.
 
You have probably already guessed what we did. Yes, we know precisely who is now before us. You are a player from the 21st century, an ancestor to the Softie. Now you are sitting at your computer and reading this message. You think this is only a game. We got it right.
 
As has already been said, we have all the history of the UniVang at our disposal. We turned to the proto-Softie-people from the 21st century-as the later Softie know too much about what happened. Interactive digital miniatures of humans-computer games-proved to be the most useful method of intercepting streams of your consciousness. Nine years prior to the opening of the first Passage we ensured the invention and broad distribution of a new computer game, and in this way the future became bound to the past. We needed strong, stable, lengthy signals from some of the people.
 
The game opened up a channel which allowed the player's mind to take direct control of a real vanger unit: your mind, human. It took some time for the vanger's memory to duplicate all the principal matrixes of its host's will and intelligence, but now your clone exists and is ready to act independently, as you have come to the end of the game. After this session you will go on leading a regular life and may even one day become a Softie, while your vanger clone will set off for the unknown. Three seconds are left before your mutual consciousness splits.
 
Now we need to explain at least roughly the purpose of our experiments. You have already noticed that as a human you are now on Earth, or rather on its protomodel. After the Clash, our segment of reality became suddenly isolated. All this time the local Spectors have been trying to get to the current Earth, but so far it has been impossible. Only certain super-vangers are able to go through the Passage. We have already managed to send several of our appointees there, but have not yet established communications. It seems this does not work, which is why we improved our plan.
 
You have talked to Parapheen, our resident machine in the Chain. It was created through the efforts of our subordinate bios to communicate with active vangers. You followed its order to place a singular transmitter at a point of anomaly in our reality: Threall. This is our attempt to reach beyond the limits of this world. We cannot tell you more, as our hypothesis is beyond your comprehension. Know that you did everything right. Your attempt to get through to Earth when this transmitter is active will probably be successful.
 
Human, your vanger has begun moving independently. It has made the transition, and its further destiny is unknown. Farewell...


[Final 4]
Inf-Event Control> Activating advanced Monad. Analyzing. 
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. Inf-Event Control. Block for Observing Everything. 
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed. Block for explaining the terms for the sliding-by Monads. 
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. Monad. Present. Circumstantiation of the term postponed.
 
Inf-Reality Stabilizer> Status. Universe UniVang-3/8 online. Extended snapshot stable. Monad reserve normal. Outflow of the tested units normal. Spoilage rate within allowance, deviation insignificant. 
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. Inf-Reality Stabilizer. Block for implementation of small utility universes.
 
Inf-Event Control> Analysis complete. The Monad has been tested for second-order mind in accordance with 'Human Vanger.' Decoding results. 
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. 'Human Vanger.' Serial test of incoming Monads by submerging into class KxD small universe, ID U/VNG-3/8.
 
Inf-Event Control> Sensory level of the Monad being processed is zero. Category overloading not complete. Interference required. 
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Information in residual terms. Human, you do not exist. Testing your structure for mind integrity and strength of will was completed successfully. Your Monad was submerged into a small universe for analysis of autonomous behavior in a specific nested reality. Type of loaded memory: Human of Earth - proto-Softie, from the time before Passages. Advanced features: computer gamer. Scenario: double submerging into the schematic subspace of vangers reflecting the late stage of this small universe.
 
Inf-Reality Stabilizer> Status. Routine purge of the universe UniVang-3/8 complete. Summary: Level of local errors normal. Persistent anomaly detected in the reserved layer of reality. Secondary check-up. Error not found. 
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. Purging the small reality. Checking consistency of extended snapshot. In residual terms: eliminating enigmas and phenomena exceeding the limitations of the simulated being.
 
Inf-Event Control> Analysis of the exposed Monad complete. Result positive. Volitional characteristics of the Monad and its decision-making capabilities satisfy the standard. 
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Information in residual terms. All Monads that fulfilled the requirements of the resident unit Carmane in their vanger stage satisfy the pipeline entry requirements. The rest of Monads are immediately destroyed as spoilage.
 
Inf-Distribution of Raw Material> The Monad is tested for presence of a mind of the second order and is forwarded to the reserve storage of autonomous volition units. 
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. Inf-Distribution of Raw Material. Monad filter. Second order of mind allows the Monad to function on parallel posts of freedom.
 
Infernal Event Control> Off... 
Infernal Reality Stabilizer> Off... 
Infernal Resuscitation of the Exposed> Off... 
Infernal Distribution of Raw Material> Off...


[Final 5]
External Thoughts Received En Route to Earth... 
Vanger. The Penetrated Spectators are speaking to you. You have already decomposed into Passage particles, but have not yet left the Chain. You are practically on Earth, and there is no way back. We finally have a moment to explain to you who you are and who we are, as you have reached the point when we are obliged to explain everything and we will not have another chance. The first circle has been passed. Ahead lies what is unknown even to us...

The Spectators have reached the ultimate fundamentals of the Universe, but we had to transform into another possible form of being to achieve this. Our reality is regularly subjected to cleansing, which destroys any phenomena outside the laws of this world. Once, an error or fluctuation occurred which led to our appearance. We managed to penetrate the situation just in time, before the next purge, and changed our nature by using someone's reserved layers of reality. Since then we have been able to quietly observe the world as it develops, able to return endlessly to what we have already seen, though the longer we did this, the more artificial the world seemed to become. We owe our existence to an external will.

The birth of the Spectators coincided with the outward expansion of the future Softie: the human civilization. What happened after that is well known to you. The incomprehensible Creature Soup was to bring an end to this enclave world, but in the scenario of our reality vangers suddenly appeared on the surface of the worlds. The rise of these mechanisms was not logical. To us the vangers became the ultimate riddle of the Chain, and we watched them closely, trying to comprehend the essence of their existence and the nature of this phenomenon...

Our form of existence eliminates direct interaction with physical reality: we can only exchange information. All our attempts to establish contact with the vangers were in vain, and soon it become clear that we were dealing with a mechanical form of will, an exception to the evolution. The Chain was turning into a uniform metastructure. The supervangers became our next discovery: rare forms of this creature characterized by an extremely high level of personal progress in exploring the world and a conspicuous freedom of behavior. Sometimes independent contact with them was possible, but we were never able to interpret their conduct and calculate a system of prediction.

The vangers have no material substance. We did an immense amount of work communicating lucidly with the natives of the Chain. They informed us that in a certain instant the mechos comes to life and begins to act intelligently. All attempts to penetrate inside the mechos were fruitless, as there is nothing in there that could possibly be an intelligent creature. The vangers control the mechos from without and can move between them, but no sign of a physical presence of vangers outside the mechos has been detected. They are one entity in some respects, but the nucleus of the supervangers seems to lie beyond the boundaries of this reality.

However, the Spectors managed to find a way to implant their own forms of autonomous wills into the mechos, and at that point we had the chance to launch our own vangers. This process was initiated at the lowermost stratum of the Universe, as the vangers are not a normal part of this reality. So, we started our experiments. Our artificially created vangers have proved practically inviable in the UniVang, though our experiments are still in progress. Later, however, another way was found: we discovered highly powerful, adaptive sources of will in the past.

You have probably already guessed what we did. Yes, we know precisely who is now before us. You are a player from the 21st century, an ancestor to the Softie. Now you are sitting at your computer and reading this message. You think this is only a game. We got it right.

As has already been said, we have all the history of the UniVang at our disposal. We turned to the proto-Softie-people from the 21st century-as the later Softie know too much about what happened. Interactive digital miniatures of humans-computer games-proved to be the most useful method of intercepting streams of your consciousness. Nine years prior to the opening of the first Passage we ensured the invention and broad distribution of a new computer game, and in this way the future became bound to the past. We needed strong, stable, lengthy signals from some of the people.

The game opened up a channel which allowed the player's mind to take direct control of a real vanger unit: your mind, human. It took some time for the vanger's memory to duplicate all the principal matrixes of its host's will and intelligence, but now your clone exists and is ready to act independently, as you have come to the end of the game. After this session you will go on leading a regular life and may even one day become a Softie, while your vanger clone will set off for the unknown. Three seconds are left before your mututal consciousness splits.

Now we need to explain at least roughly the purpose of our experiments. You have already noticed that as a human you are now on Earth, or rather on its protomodel. After the Clash, our segment of reality became suddenly isolated. All this time the local Spectors have been trying to get to the current Earth, but so far it has been impossible. Only certain super-vangers are able to go through the Passage. We have already managed to send several of our appointees there, but have not yet established communications. It seems this does not work, which is why we improved our plan.

You have talked to Parapheen, our resident machine in the Chain. It was created through the efforts of our subordinate bios to communicate with active vangers. You followed its order to place a singular transmitter at a point of anomaly in our reality: Threall. This is our attempt to reach beyond the limits of this world. We cannot tell you more, as our hypothesis is beyond your comprehension. Know that you did everything right. Your attempt to get through to Earth when this transmitter is active will probably be successful.

Human, your vanger has begun moving independently. It has made the transition, and its further destiny is unknown. Farewell...
Inf-Event Control> Activating advanced Monad. Analyzing.
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. Inf-Event Control. Block for Observing Everything.
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed. Block for explaining the terms for the sliding-by Monads.
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. Monad. Present. Circumstantiation of the term postponed.

Inf-Reality Stabilizer> Status. Universe UniVang-3/8 online. Extended snapshot stable. Monad reserve normal. Outflow of the tested units normal. Spoilage rate within allowance, deviation insignificant.
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. Inf-Reality Stabilizer. Block for implementation of small utility universes.

Inf-Event Control> Analysis complete. The Monad has been tested for second-order mind in accordance with 'Human Vanger.' Decoding results.
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. 'Human Vanger.' Serial test of incoming Monads by submerging into class KxD small universe, ID U/VNG-3/8.
 
Inf-Event Control> Sensory level of the Monad being processed is zero. Category overloading not complete. Interference required.
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Information in residual terms. Human, you do not exist. Testing your structure for mind integrity and strength of will completed successfully. Your Monad was submerged into a small universe for analysis of autonomous behavior in a specific nested reality. Type of loaded memory: Human of Earth - proto-Softie from the time before Passages. Advanced features: computer gamer. Scenario: double submerging into the schematic subspace of vangers reflecting the late stage of this small universe.

Inf-Reality Stabilizer> Status. Routine purge of the universe UniVang-3/8 complete. Summary: Level of local errors normal. A persistent anomaly detected in the reserved layer of reality. Secondary check-up. The error not found.
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. Purging the small reality. Checking consistency of extended snapshot. In residual terms: eliminating enigmas and phenomena exceeding the limitations of the simulated being.

Inf-Event Control> Analysis of the exposed Monad complete. Result positive. Volitional characteristics of the Monad and its decision-making capabilities satisfy the standard.
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Information in residual terms. All Monads that fulfilled the requirements of the resident unit Carmane in their vanger stage, satisfy the pipeline entry requirements. The rest of Monads are immediately destroyed as spoilage.

Inf-Distribution of Raw Material> The Monad tested for presence of the mind of second order and is forwarded to the reserve storage of autonomous volition units.
Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Info. Inf-Distribution of Raw Material. Monad filter. Second order of mind allows the Monad to function on parallel posts of freedom.

Inf-Reality Stabilizer> CAUTION! Emergency interrupt. Disturbances of the highest class of severity detected in UniVang-3/8. Emergency purge of the reality did not eliminate the anomaly. Persistent indications of the hypothetical Third Will are observed in the sterile TRL-zone. According to the instruction 'About the Possibility of the Emergence of Analogous Reason' a snapshot of the reality has been saved.

Inf-Event Control> Signal of category 'A' registered: 'The Spectors want to talk to you'. The semantics of the signal are beyond the scope of the parsing unit of the pipeline. Monad testing is suspended.
Inf-Distribution of Raw Material> According to the instructions, all Monads tested in a universe with a discovered anomaly are forwarded to the Experts as potential carriers of the Phenomenon.

Inf-Resuscitation of the Exposed> Operating instructions for small utility universes. There is an infinitesimal probability of an emergence of Reason in nested realities. Any cases of anomalies of the highest class of severity being discovered that are not eliminated by an emergency purge must be subjected to detailed analysis by the Experts. The creators of the Monad pipeline assume the possibility of the emergence of the Third Will...

Infernal Event Control> Off...
Infernal Reality Stabilizer> Off...
Infernal Resuscitation of the Exposed> Off...
Infernal Distribution of Raw Material> Off...
